[Amit Varma]: What do the 1990s mean to you? The answer, of course, depends on context. Where you were
[Amit Varma]: during those years, what your experiences were like at the time, the kind of music and
[Amit Varma]: books and films you consumed, and some of you may not even have been born then. My last
[Amit Varma]: episode where J. Arjun Singh and Subrat Mohanty was about cinema, and though none of us would
[Amit Varma]: call the 90s our favourite decade in terms of films, it was pleasant enough. Kieslowski,
[Amit Varma]: Tarantino, David Dhawan, what's not to like? But think about the 1990s from the point of
[Amit Varma]: view of a Kashmiri child growing up in Kashmir in a time of constant curfew, occasional raids,
[Amit Varma]: army bunkers in residential neighbourhoods, and the fear, every time a loved one left
[Amit Varma]: home, that they may not return. For you had seen this before, and death was both normal
[Amit Varma]: and normalised. How do you grow up in a world like that? How do you process it and make
[Amit Varma]: sense of it? What do the 1990s mean to you?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Farah Bashir, who studied psychology
[Amit Varma]: in college, worked as a photojournalist for Reuters, and then chose to walk away from
[Amit Varma]: that life and try and write about her past. Farah grew up in Kashmir in the 1990s, took
[Amit Varma]: years to come to terms with that childhood, and has now brought it to us in a deeply moving
[Amit Varma]: book called Rumours of Spring. Rumours of Spring is narrated from the point of view
[Amit Varma]: of the adolescent Farah before she comes to adulthood and gains the frames to make sense
[Amit Varma]: of that world. It's impressionistic and detailed, and gives us such a clear view of that young
[Amit Varma]: girl's interior life, which mirrors both the starkness and turmoil of her exterior
[Amit Varma]: world. It's a powerful book that has stayed with me after I read it, and I was delighted
[Amit Varma]: to have Farah on this show to talk about her experiences as a child in Kashmir, and about
[Amit Varma]: the experience of reliving that childhood and writing this book. Before we begin our
[Amit Varma]: conversation though, let's go to a unique kind of commercial break, Capital Gyan by
[Amit Varma]: Deepak Chinoy. This is like a show within a commercial from the kind sponsors of this
[Amit Varma]: episode, Capital Mind. And today's show within a commercial, is like a commercial
[Amit Varma]: for this show, which is too meta for me, but what to do? Deepak is like that only.
[Unknown]: It's a strange thing, this Amit Verma's podcast. Who'd have thought that so many
[Unknown]: of us would love 5 plus hour podcasts? There's a quality to the seen and the unseen. That
[Unknown]: beats all stereotypes, right? Like, keep it short, they said. If you can say it in 5 words,
[Unknown]: don't use 50. That seems so wrong. Sometimes it takes 50 to tell you what those 5 words
[Unknown]: really mean. The attention span of the average user is 8 minutes, they say. Well, here's
[Unknown]: a podcast that does what, 400 minutes and still keeps people's attention and makes
[Unknown]: them want even more. All these sayings, they may be right in their own way, but the truth
[Unknown]: is, there's great value in the exact opposite. The world of business is similarly crazy.
[Unknown]: Who'd have thought the biggest payment company in India, or two of them, would not be banks?
[Unknown]: That it is now dominated, the space, by a company that does advertising and search,
[Unknown]: like Google Pay. And a company that sells groceries and cheap towels, like PhonePe,
[Unknown]: which is owned by Walmart. Who'd have thought that an oil refiner that makes petrol and
[Unknown]: diesel, like Reliance, would revolutionise telecom to a point where all calls are free
[Unknown]: and India has the cheapest data in the whole world? Who'd have thought that a company that
[Unknown]: financed three-wheeler autos from Bajaj Auto, would then go on to become India's largest
[Unknown]: or second-largest non-banking lender, worth more than three times what Bajaj Auto is?
[Unknown]: Investing is not intuitive. It's unpredictable. Sometimes you have to stop predicting and
[Unknown]: start reacting. Let the market tell you what's happening, and change your view accordingly.
[Unknown]: As my friend Joy Bhattacharya has said, angels can fly because they take themselves lightly.
[Unknown]: With CapitalMind, where we manage over a thousand crores, we aren't scared of uncertainty.
[Unknown]: We deeply respect the unknown. And sometimes, investing in the future means being aware
[Unknown]: that things are changing rapidly, and then changing along with it.
[Unknown]: I'm Deepak Shenoy, CEO at CapitalMind. In our portfolio management service, we try to
[Unknown]: embrace the unknown and choose to react quickly, rather than focus on predicting the future.
[Unknown]: Talk to us and we'll tell you more about our investing process. We're at cm.social slash
[Unknown]: seen unseen. Be prepared for change and be prepared to change. cm.social slash seen unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Farah, welcome to the seen and the unseen. Thank you, Amit. It's a pleasure being here.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I was in Delhi three or four months ago. I'm just saying this for the benefit
[Amit Varma]: of my listeners. And I invited Farah and she said yes, but then there was a little mishap
[Amit Varma]: and I think you had your leg in a cast. So I have to say I loved reading your book. It
[Amit Varma]: is as we were discussing before we started so moving. But apart from the book, I've realized
[Amit Varma]: that I don't know much about you at all. Unlike most of my other guests, they'll be you know,
[Amit Varma]: who have 50 YouTube videos, six other books and all of that. So I'm, so I'm keen to find
[Amit Varma]: out more about you. And of course, a book and a lot of what we talk about today is about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, your early childhood growing up in Kashmir and all of that. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: give me a sort of a broader sense of, you know, what do you do, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Sure. Firstly, thanks for having me on the show. I mean, I've been listening to episodes
[Guest]: and they're really engaging. And now to be here is an absolute pleasure. So, well, the
[Guest]: book, the period where the book, which the book sort of tackles is between 89 and 94.
[Guest]: And I'm going to give you an idea of what I did after 94. After 94, I did my college
[Guest]: and then I did my, a year at the university in Kashmir. And then after which I went to
[Guest]: Singapore to study. So I did my master's there and joined Reuters there. I was a sub-editor
[Guest]: there. And that's when things changed in me when I joined Reuters and you deep dive into
[Guest]: news so much. Earlier you've been watching and reading and hearing it. And I started,
[Guest]: news started coming in from Kashmir from, this is 2005, six, seven, eight. And I was
[Guest]: looking at editing Basra in Iraq invasion and Palestine and also then Kashmir. And that's
[Guest]: when I realized the way other conflicts get spoken about, there was nothing on Kashmir
[Guest]: really at that level. So it was always someone else talking, someone else writing. And this
[Guest]: is around the time when Basharat Peer's book, Curfewed Night also came out. Until then,
[Guest]: he and I are almost the same age and we're the same batch. I hadn't really read anything
[Guest]: by a woman or a man, Kashmiri's perspective. So I started thinking about writing. I started
[Guest]: thinking about telling the story. And this is exactly 2008 when the governments were
[Guest]: toppled and then after that it was pretty restive till about 2017. Every summer used
[Guest]: to be a bloody summer. And then there was a clause in the contract of Reuters that if
[Guest]: you were to write a book, you had to take permissions. And at that point, I think it
[Guest]: was in my head that if I have to write, I cannot be in journalism. And also I was very
[Guest]: passionate about being in journalism. So I thought two things can't take the same amount
[Guest]: of energy from me. I'll have to work on the book and the story that I was thinking of
[Guest]: as a girl growing up in a conflict zone. So then I took up jobs, sometimes in advertising,
[Guest]: sometimes in strategy, sometimes in marketing, just to basically pay my bills because I was
[Guest]: living in Singapore and it's a very expensive place. But I would come back and I would write
[Guest]: till mornings. And I did that for about seven, eight years. I lived in Singapore for about
[Guest]: 12 years. I came back so that I could be closer home. I came to Delhi. I tend to, you know,
[Guest]: when I'm in Kashmir and I'm writing there, the writing is very different. A, I feel extremely
[Guest]: overwhelmed by whatever is happening around. So I feel like what's ever going to change
[Guest]: by writing. It feels a bit crass at times. You're like, kids are dying on the streets.
[Guest]: And this is around that time when I was thinking and writing and framing the story. And then
[Guest]: you have a little bit of distance and the normal life and the freedoms that you experience
[Guest]: outside, the contrast is so stark. You feel like, oh, you know, the story needs to be
[Guest]: told. So apart from writing, also trying to understand different realities, trying to
[Guest]: navigate life. And then, of course, life happens to you and things happen. But the focus has
[Guest]: always been the story. And I wrote about two manuscripts, which I discarded on my own.
[Guest]: I wasn't happy. I was trying to write fiction and probably trying to create that emotional
[Guest]: and physical distance from the story. But there were some dreams that I used to have.
[Guest]: I used to have reckoning dreams, which then I examined and I started writing these four,
[Guest]: five, I used to call them fillers. And I thought these would propel my story. These would fill
[Guest]: the gaps in the big story once the penny drops and I'd be able to write a big book. But then
[Guest]: I realised that these were not the fillers or the passages that were intended to put
[Guest]: in the narrative or to furthering of plot. It was really, you know, I spoke to someone
[Guest]: at one of the universities, I went to deliver a talk and they said, there was a Kashmiri
[Guest]: girl then, and she said, when I read the book, I realised that we can actually talk about
[Guest]: these things, like how you feel if you walk, if you take a step that's a little too loud
[Guest]: because in old houses, the staircases are wooden, and it might attract undue attention
[Guest]: from outside on the road. She said, I can still feel that fear, that paranoia that it
[Guest]: creates, but I didn't think it was important to write about those things. So when you grow
[Guest]: up in a situation like that, in a conflict zone like that, you start normalising a lot
[Guest]: of things which are not supposed to be normal at all, but that's the reality, you know.
[Guest]: So I know I've digressed from the original question, but it was just generally to give
[Guest]: you an idea of, I have always been thinking about the book after graduating and kept various
[Guest]: other jobs to pay my bills, tried to sometimes write for the newspapers back home. But again,
[Guest]: the focus was, what was I going to write about? Because there's so much that's been written
[Guest]: on Kashmir, and that will be written on Kashmir from various points of view. But what wasn't
[Guest]: really there, what I had been looking for so many years was a girl's story, a young
[Guest]: girl's story. And I don't really see things changing in a drastic way. I have my 11-year-old
[Guest]: niece. What I experienced at the age of 11, she's seen that from the age of 1 or 2.
[Guest]: They live in this particularly restive area, and she's almost grown up on tear gas and
[Guest]: power spray. So she has respiratory issues, and she's 11. And every time there used
[Guest]: to be that power spray, pepper spray outside, and she would be crying and asking her mother
[Guest]: to help her breathe. So seeing things like this, and then it gets normalized, and the
[Guest]: next day she goes to school and it's forgotten. But, you know, also it's a small society.
[Guest]: Everyone knows everyone. So people don't overtly talk about their experiences either. The way
[Guest]: I've written in the book, whether it was my obsession to pull out my hair, for example.
[Guest]: And then again, when I was studying in Singapore, I read this book, Good Women of China. And
[Guest]: that is where I realized there's this girl in that book, in the first chapter, or first
[Guest]: or second chapter, who gets molested at home. And then she has an accident and she has to
[Guest]: be hospitalized. So as she's healing at the hospital, she starts poking her wound again,
[Guest]: so that the healing or the treatment is delayed, and she doesn't have to return to that site
[Guest]: of fear and violence. So I realized when there's so much happening around women, they start
[Guest]: turning against their own bodies, because that's where you have the control. So if you
[Guest]: are living in a conservative society, patriarchal society, on top of that, there is this kind
[Guest]: of militarization and there is a proper conflict brewing, ongoing, then what do women do at
[Guest]: that point? Who do they turn to? So they're almost like dual recipients of violence. And
[Guest]: at that point, and it's something when after I wrote about it, I've spoken to some journalists
[Guest]: who also said, spoke about when they lose control, how they sort of engage in self-harm.
[Guest]: So I feel like, even though it's not palatable, but these are things which I'm sure if we
[Guest]: were to speak to other women and girls, and my sample size wasn't really big, I spoke
[Guest]: about, in my book, I talk about 14 women, including myself, and their ways to cope or
[Guest]: not cope with war or an ongoing conflict. And there was a cousin's wife who actually
[Guest]: killed herself. She drowned, she jumped into the river, and then her body was fished out
[Guest]: a couple of days later. And if you met her, if you looked at her, she was the most, she
[Guest]: had the most calming presence, and she looked very, she was quiet, and clearly she was,
[Guest]: there was agitation within her, which is not, which wasn't visible to anyone until she took
[Guest]: that drastic step. And so, yeah, other, or my aunt, who was 60, and she used to salute
[Guest]: the patrolling party. So how do different, and it's, it's also takes you back to what,
[Guest]: you know, Svetlana Alekseyevich talks about, she says, women experience war and conflict,
[Guest]: insurgency very differently. And I realised no two women have the same experience. You
[Guest]: might be caught in a crossfiring, or a bomb blast, or a crackdown, and your experience
[Guest]: could be very different. And we could be sisters, and the way you would deal with that moment.
[Guest]: And I just feel not enough gets spoken about, because there's a, you know how gender is
[Guest]: used, it's also used to silence a community. And horrible things are done to women in a
[Guest]: particular society, if they have to be subjugated, if that community has to be subjugated. So
[Guest]: as a result, you're always treading very carefully. And, and we don't get to hear things which
[Guest]: should be spoken about to get a complete picture of a particular society's, I mean, you see
[Guest]: whatever is happening on the street, that doesn't, that gets documented, documented
[Guest]: by the journalists, killings, or stone pelting, or crossfiring, or a bomb blast. But what
[Guest]: women bear and carry with them, that doesn't really get as much, spoken about as much,
[Guest]: I feel. And it was also, writing about this book was also to, you know, it was, I was
[Guest]: 13. And when things changed that, that night, when I went to get a haircut, and by the time
[Guest]: we came out of the salon, things had completely changed. Outside, there was a first incident
[Guest]: of white firing outside. And it's a, it's a particular fracture, which sort of remains
[Guest]: in your life. And, you know, we talk about mental health issues, we talk about statistics
[Guest]: again, in classified terms. I was a student of psychology back home. So I used to, used
[Guest]: to go to field, for fieldwork to, to the institution there. And we would come back with the findings
[Guest]: from the fieldwork, and we would tell our professors that what we study, and what we
[Guest]: read in the books is very different from what we see there, and how people, like someone
[Guest]: who has schizophrenia, would change, or split personality disorder, would change their personality
[Guest]: or their tone in a matter of like 10 seconds. So again, when we talk about mental health
[Guest]: issues, there's a certain generalization. But I don't think, like, for example, that
[Guest]: I also talk about it in the book, you have PTSD, which is post traumatic stress disorder,
[Guest]: but what happens when it's perennial, and it doesn't stop. So I feel there are also
[Guest]: limitations there. And one, there are many things that one could write about, and one
[Guest]: hopefully will write about, but also from other cultures who have experienced similar
[Guest]: realities. I remember reading this Turkish book by Irfan Orga, a lesser known novelist
[Guest]: from Turkey, and he'd written about his mother, and during the war, many, many decades ago,
[Guest]: and towards the end, how his mother loses her mind during the war. So again, it's from
[Guest]: a male perspective, a woman telling her story, it's actually, I think it's a memoir, Portrait
[Guest]: of a Young Turkish Family, or a Turkish family, sorry, may not be young. So that was what
[Guest]: I've been doing. That is what I, that's how the idea of writing a book came about. But
[Guest]: I think it's this irrepressible, not desire, but this need to tell your story, you feel
[Guest]: stifled the whole time. But some people just, I mean, my cousin, who was, I mentioned her
[Guest]: briefly in the book, she was this very, she had a lot of gusto and a lot of, you know,
[Guest]: courage, and she would be like, oh, let's go to the UN office, and let's take the memo
[Guest]: with us and memorandum, and we can actually sit outside the office. And my aunt used to
[Guest]: be like, she was all of 14. And I remember at that point, I would, whatever was happening
[Guest]: around me was an out of body experience. So I wouldn't engage with anything at that point
[Guest]: that I said, till Reuters happened. But now you see her, she's completely blocked everything
[Guest]: around her. All she's focused on is her kids going to school. And so, yeah, I mean, the,
[Guest]: it's also like how people then just accept it as fate, which is really sad, because,
[Guest]: I mean, like I said, I keep looking at my niece, and I wonder, like, what would someone
[Guest]: like, what would her counterpart in some other part of the world, what would her upbringing
[Guest]: be? How would she grow up? Because when August 25, 2019 happened, and the article was de-operationalised,
[Guest]: this is a year before pandemic, schools were already shut. And there was a certain similarity
[Guest]: to things which struck me as almost like my childhood having been repeated again. She
[Guest]: started blocking school completely in her, in her mind, she was in grade two, and she
[Guest]: started painting a lot. And I used to do the same thing, I used to keep sketching the whole
[Guest]: time. And my grandmother used to get really upset. And she started doing that. And then,
[Guest]: and then there used to be periods where she would really get ready and, and ask my father,
[Guest]: her grandfather, to take her out to meet her friends, because she would miss them. And
[Guest]: I remember craving the company of my friends and going to school. So some things, like
[Guest]: I said, it's a repeat of, it's almost like a life which is templatised, and you keep,
[Guest]: it's been set for you and your generations will, will sort of live the same life all
[Guest]: over again and again. And trying to, this was to gather those experiences. But writing
[Guest]: about those four years, it was also like, I particularly chose that because 94 is when
[Guest]: my grandmother passed away, and I was very close to her. And I saw a way, I saw something
[Guest]: which I realised later, that her existence became extremely decimated. You know, she
[Guest]: was a starring personality, she would give career advice to people. And suddenly you
[Guest]: saw whatever was happening around us, she had no idea of what it was and what was going
[Guest]: to happen. No experience there. So as a result, her space started shrinking. And she spent
[Guest]: a lot of time on the prayer mat, which I didn't really see her doing that before, like she
[Guest]: would pray five times a day, but not spend extended amounts of time. She would spend
[Guest]: a lot of time sitting by the window, but those were shut for years, because we had this house
[Guest]: which was on the, on the street. And we didn't open windows for many, many years. And earlier
[Guest]: it was just the winter, but even in winter, she was asthmatic. So she would keep a bit
[Guest]: of window open to let the fresh air come in. So her existence was completely decimated
[Guest]: and, and seeing her try, make sense of a world that she was thrown into, or that was thrust
[Guest]: upon her, was something that I think when I wrote the book or wrote these memory, about
[Guest]: these memories and these chapters is what came to me that I had that trauma. I couldn't
[Guest]: articulate it then. And she then becomes the spine of the book and her funeral becomes
[Guest]: the spine. It also shows that how natural death at that point was such a blessing, dying
[Guest]: of natural causes. And because every time you came back, it was either in crossfiring,
[Guest]: someone was being assassinated or had been assassinated, like this friend of mine, I
[Guest]: remember making that call particularly to school that morning, and I couldn't get through.
[Guest]: Then I called a friend of mine and she's like, there's no school today. I said, what happened?
[Guest]: She said, Rabia's father has been killed and, and I still, and then that friend died, but
[Guest]: she died of a heart attack. So there was, it was, you know, suddenly enter like a, like
[Guest]: a nightmare, and that becomes your adolescence and your teenage years. So again, there was
[Guest]: this urgency to talk about that. And a lot of people block it, but I don't know how much
[Guest]: can it really be blocked subconsciously.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that makes a book particularly powerful for me is a choice that you made
[Amit Varma]: to tell it from the viewpoint of that adolescent girl, you know, and not come at it from a
[Amit Varma]: distance and talk about it like a third person looking back and all of that, but it's pretty
[Amit Varma]: much the viewpoint of that girl. And therefore, there are so many things that are normalized
[Amit Varma]: and minimized, both on the inside and the outside, you know, so on the outside, there
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, and we'll talk, I'd love to talk about each of these as we go along, but
[Amit Varma]: things like the constant curfews, the bunkers, the militarized gays, the raids and crackdowns,
[Amit Varma]: even little things like we're not using courtyards the same way, there's no spice grinding, we're
[Amit Varma]: not going to attics as a place of comfort. So many things are just normalized, not just
[Amit Varma]: on the outside, but also on the inside, in terms of, you know, just the little girl pulling
[Amit Varma]: her hair out and the self harm that she's doing there, or sort of not eating palak kukur,
[Amit Varma]: for example, because that particular dish is associated with death, you know, something
[Amit Varma]: bad that happened, or even the fantasy life of that young girl where she takes that cassette
[Amit Varma]: young Tarang and she's dancing to songs inside a room. Right. And, and I'll talk about each
[Amit Varma]: of those. And I want to double click on each of those. But first, the larger question here
[Amit Varma]: is that in that narrative voice, it's all normalized, it's all minimized. That's what
[Amit Varma]: it is. But you mentioned that when you came to Reuters, you learned to look at the world
[Amit Varma]: with a journalistic gaze, as it were. And I'm interested in that gaze. And one need
[Amit Varma]: not even call it a journalistic gaze, it could just be a gaze that leads you to look at yourself,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps, and see things that you did not see before, not just see the what, but also go
[Amit Varma]: a little further back, see the why. And sometimes, you know, you don't even know the why. But
[Amit Varma]: just, you know, take that one step back and be able to look at yourself. And I'm guessing
[Amit Varma]: that pretty much everything in the book, or pretty much everything in my own memories,
[Amit Varma]: when I think about my past, or any of my guests, when they talk about the past, a lot of it
[Amit Varma]: is a construction in hindsight, you're looking back at events, and you're figuring it out.
[Amit Varma]: You know, those layers fall, you're seeing things you didn't see before, and they were
[Amit Varma]: always in front of you. But you're sort of seeing them now. So before we actually get
[Amit Varma]: into the book and all of these individual things, I want to sort of get to understand
[Amit Varma]: a little bit better how this process worked for you of self-examination. And obviously,
[Amit Varma]: when you're looking at yourself, you're not just looking at yourself, you're not just
[Amit Varma]: looking at your family, you're looking at the world as it is, you're looking at society
[Amit Varma]: as it is, you're looking at everything, right? What is that process for you then, as a writer,
[Amit Varma]: because I'm guessing part of the spur for that is a distance. You're in Singapore, you're
[Amit Varma]: far away, you can look back. Part of the spur for that is the analogs that you can see in
[Amit Varma]: other conflicts like Palestine or wherever. And, you know, just looking at the same things
[Amit Varma]: playing out in different contexts, I guess, could help you see this more clearly. And
[Amit Varma]: so, what was that process like of turning your gaze inwards in this way? And is the
[Amit Varma]: act of writing itself something that helped you with that? Like, you know, I've had guests
[Amit Varma]: on the show who talked to me about the importance of journaling. Because every time you kind
[Amit Varma]: of journal, you are not just examining the self, you're shaping the self, right? So,
[Amit Varma]: I want to kind of know a little bit about that, because that's, that led to the book,
[Amit Varma]: but it's not in the book. And it's really fascinating to me that sort of process of
[Amit Varma]: being able to look back, examine your memories, you know, how hard is it? How, you know?
[Guest]: See, 90s was a decade that nobody will forget, whoever witnessed it. So, inadvertently, unwittingly,
[Guest]: you will talk about something that happened in the 90s. It could be someone who just died
[Guest]: of natural causes. So, there's this brother-in-law of mine who passed away many years ago in
[Guest]: 99, of a heart attack. But you remember how he survived the Havel massacre, for example.
[Guest]: So that is the association. So, there is nothing that you, there aren't many, like, there are
[Guest]: associations with the decade. So, people, relatives, every time you get together, it
[Guest]: comes up. A doesn't leave you. Second, to your point, journaling is extremely important.
[Guest]: This is something that I started when I was 13. So, we wouldn't go to school, and our
[Guest]: school diaries had these one page broken into two. So, there was a partition. So, I started
[Guest]: writing. I thought, I had two fears, that I was going to forget things, and someone
[Guest]: was going to die, or something was going to happen, and I wouldn't be able to remember
[Guest]: or record. I don't know, there was this strange thing of losing memory. I don't know what
[Guest]: that really, I haven't examined that, though. But probably it's your existence, or it's
[Guest]: your identity that you don't want to, like, what, you're going through such a big change.
[Guest]: I mean, you may not be able to articulate it then. So, I started writing every little
[Guest]: detail I would recognize and remember, and it almost became like a habit. So, sometimes
[Guest]: later, when I was studying in Singapore, we would go for a movie, a bunch of us, and I
[Guest]: would, when we would come out and discuss some things, and I would talk about things
[Guest]: which everyone else had missed. So, people started thinking I was some kind of a strange
[Guest]: person, like looking at details, or I would remember things like, or you, things people
[Guest]: said a year ago, or what were they even wearing during that particular time. So, I started
[Guest]: realizing that I had started registering or engaging with memory in a very different way.
[Guest]: And on top of that, when you have everyone around you still speaking of the 90s as if
[Guest]: it hasn't really passed, it then doesn't really leave your being, it's there and it's a part
[Guest]: of you. So, I didn't really need a lot of looking back to do because it's ever present.
[Guest]: What I did really see was how, I mean, there is this book by a Palestinian author called,
[Guest]: that I read after I wrote my first draft, I sent my first draft, actually a few chapters
[Guest]: to a friend, and he said, you should really read this book because it's similar to what
[Guest]: you're writing. And it's Suad, Amiri, Sharon and my mother-in-law, it's about 40 days that
[Guest]: they get stuck in curfew and little things that happen in their, in the neighborhood.
[Guest]: And there was this particular thing, activity that they do at night, they bang pots and
[Guest]: pans. And that's what we used to do in the 90s, where there was this metallic monster
[Guest]: who used to come and attack people in their houses, and used to do exactly the same thing.
[Guest]: And anyone you tell from whoever has lived through the 90s, will tell you the details.
[Guest]: So there was no, one hadn't really stepped away to look back. But, and then I read literature
[Guest]: from other conflict zones, to see what their experiences had been. And it's not really,
[Guest]: I think politicians also just don't want to innovate, they follow what's happening around
[Guest]: the world. And then, and you see, almost like a shared existence, and how people, like,
[Guest]: for example, when the book came out, and there was a journalist who spoke to me, and she
[Guest]: said it reminded her of Derry Girls, the Irish, the coming of age series. Or there is an Irish
[Guest]: woman in Kashmir, married to a Kashmiri, she's lived there for 30 odd years. She said she
[Guest]: couldn't read my book, because it just reminded her of her childhood. So you see, then there
[Guest]: is much something bigger than your own experiences, which sort of where people have also lived
[Guest]: these experiences. So I read those books to process almost what we had, what my childhood
[Guest]: or our, especially our generation had been through, because we did see pre 89. And then
[Guest]: we also saw post 89. And, and you keep wondering what, like, for example, there was, my grandmother
[Guest]: really wanted me to become a doctor. And it was only because she was really fond of Lakshmi
[Guest]: Shree, this Kashmiri Pandit neighbor we had. And she used to respect her a lot, because
[Guest]: she'd be like, you know, she works so hard, she's up the whole night. So even after they
[Guest]: left, or they had to flee. So for many years, my life was sort of informed or the choices
[Guest]: I was making by Lakshmi Shree's career. And then I didn't have a moment to think, why
[Guest]: would I want to become a doctor? And my grandmother decided it. And then eventually I, I mean,
[Guest]: I did take a couple of entrance tests, I clearly didn't make it. And I realized that I was
[Guest]: far more interested in stories, I loved literature. But there are certain things, I mean, a lot
[Guest]: of things almost like you lose agency. And everything happens around you where you don't
[Guest]: even take a moment to think, why am I taking this decision and women especially. So you
[Guest]: try and see what's best for you. And again, then you find little things like dancing,
[Guest]: for example, or listening to Nazia Hassan songs, but doing it very, like away from everyone
[Guest]: else. Otherwise, now, I mean, you'll have kids engaging in, you know, like, it's not
[Guest]: a sin, it's not a crime. But as then at that point, maybe it was guilt. There was also
[Guest]: this particular cousin of mine, who was caught in cross firing, unfortunately, and he died
[Guest]: on his way to the hospital. As a result, I can never celebrate Eid. And I couldn't really
[Guest]: understand it again, till I started thinking about it actively and why was it that I was
[Guest]: so uncomfortable around Eid and it's considered to be so inauspicious if you don't wear clean
[Guest]: clothes and dress up on that day. But then you realize like how little, I mean, how life
[Guest]: is really taken away from you, you know, and it's really up to you. How do you then out
[Guest]: of sheer will, some people just give up and then they fall ill. I mean, there are so many
[Guest]: relatives, almost everyone who has a medicine box literally with them or a pouch. Every
[Guest]: aunt of mine, including my own mother, have been on antidepressants for as long as I remember
[Guest]: 18, over 18, 19 years. So some people move towards religion, some people try and remember
[Guest]: what happened, some would just give up and then the body deteriorates. So again, different
[Guest]: people trying to navigate life because at the end of the day, I mean, I lost two years,
[Guest]: for example, when I was studying because by the time I would, my results would come out,
[Guest]: it would be like half the academic year would have passed. So I lost two years like that
[Guest]: and it's not something to you in question, like what would you do? How would that change?
[Guest]: I mean, it feels strange, but you would just go with the flow and try and see what you
[Guest]: can do best. So trying to find semblance of, like I told you, my niece has completely taken
[Guest]: to art now and she, I don't know if it's really what she wants to do with her life, but where
[Guest]: are these escape routes to escape the larger reality around you and that becomes your existence.
[Guest]: And I remember again, going back to what I was telling you earlier about this institution,
[Guest]: mental institution, I used to go for fieldwork. There used to be a doctor who used to be in
[Guest]: one of the corners there and the attendants, they would say, he's been like that for the
[Guest]: last eight years and he's now worse than his patients. So it's like the 90s was a surreal
[Guest]: decade that, like I said, was almost like stepping into a nightmare and you didn't know
[Guest]: how to process it. So distance only from, I didn't have distance from it, but it was
[Guest]: really trying different ways to understand it and process it. I would paint and I would
[Guest]: go on this painting spree for weeks, but I wasn't, and I would think of other ways to
[Guest]: process it because it's a, when things happen around you at that magnitude and when you,
[Guest]: when I moved to Singapore to study, for example, it took me a year and a half to get my sleeping
[Guest]: pattern back on track. I wouldn't, sleep was something that was like eluded me since that
[Guest]: night, 89, and I would be up till four, five and then sleep for a few hours and take a
[Guest]: nap in between, maybe during the day. So insomnia, not because of insomnia, but if there was
[Guest]: also this fear, not fear, but maybe subconsciously slipping into these dreams that you saw over
[Guest]: and over again, and then you woke up equally disturbed as insomnia would leave you. So
[Guest]: trying to make sense of life, which I think I'm still like the next book that I'm working
[Guest]: on, it's, it's again about, it's Lou's adaptation of Little Women. So it's setting again, those
[Guest]: four girls and how do, so these are far more elaborate characters and plot is a little
[Guest]: more spread out. But in the current book, Rumours of Spring, it's really giving you
[Guest]: a glimpse of a time, which doesn't exist anymore. But again, I find this writing about that
[Guest]: particular age group, or even when I chose to write about my life of those years is,
[Guest]: it's a period which, it's capturing a time in Kashmir, which doesn't exist anymore. A
[Guest]: is that, but that's got, that doesn't have much to do with the fact that girls that age
[Guest]: don't have a voice. And it's, and if you sustain that feeling and if it, if it stays with you,
[Guest]: then maybe someday you'll be able to write about it. Things are different now. I mean,
[Guest]: there are photojournalists, there are journalists from Kashmir who are telling the stories.
[Guest]: But again, they're reporting on the place, about the place. Very few then, it's like
[Guest]: a, it's like an open wound that you're trying to sort of let it heal. But if you keep going
[Guest]: back and poking it, it's going to, it's going to fester for a long time. I remember when
[Guest]: I wrote first eight chapters, I used to have panic attacks and sleep, something that I
[Guest]: had never had before. But again, it was not only about me, it was also about what one
[Guest]: had seen. So I don't know if I answered your question about the distance.
[Amit Varma]: It's very, no, it's very illuminating. I mean, questions don't always have answers. They
[Amit Varma]: can lead to other questions or answers to other questions. I was struck by, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned your eye for detail, where you'll randomly notice something no one else does.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and I was sort of surprised at one point of your book where you speak
[Amit Varma]: as a little girl of going to watch Nikkah. And you remembered that you were, quote, dressed
[Amit Varma]: in one of the best frocks that I had at that time. It was a sea green organza dress with
[Amit Varma]: tiny paisley motifs at the white hem, stop quote, which is again, you know, and I'm always
[Amit Varma]: sort of marveling at this eye for detail, because if you ask me what I'm wearing now,
[Amit Varma]: I'd like have to look down and kind of notice it. You mentioned how that was a time that
[Amit Varma]: doesn't exist anymore. And there are sort of glimpses of this through the book, like
[Amit Varma]: at one point, you talk about the music system that's brought to your house, and I'll read
[Amit Varma]: out your description of it where you say, quote, before the big music system arrived
[Amit Varma]: at our house, we used to have a small stereo with two basic functions. It had a cavity
[Amit Varma]: to insert a tape into and an inbuilt radio. The new one had two spaces for tapes and integrated
[Amit Varma]: compact display at the top and also a radio. Its edges were rounded and smooth, not boxy
[Amit Varma]: like the old one. It also had detachable speakers. All in all, it took up a fair bit of space.
[Amit Varma]: It stood out as one of the very few modern items in our traditional household, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I think I'm just a little older than you. So we've, you know, grown up in the same years.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember the transition from, you know, exactly that kind of old system to this kind
[Amit Varma]: of new one. And it makes me nostalgic because it just makes me realize that so much of that
[Amit Varma]: past, so many physical things of the past are artifacts and our ways of life have sort
[Amit Varma]: of changed completely. Like my father passed last year and we sold his house and I was
[Amit Varma]: there to clear everything away. Most of most of the stuff we kind of had to just give away.
[Amit Varma]: And there were so many of these artifacts, you know, you'd come across Walkmans, you'd
[Amit Varma]: come across those old cassette players where the lid has broken off and all of that. And
[Amit Varma]: many, many, many physical books, which are also fast becoming artifacts. And I was just
[Amit Varma]: thinking about changing ways of life and how this can reflect, for example, in the interior
[Amit Varma]: life, like in the interior lives of people, like the little girl who's in your book, right?
[Amit Varma]: She's finding escape, right? But she's, even the ways that she can escape are kind of constrained.
[Amit Varma]: So she can, you know, take the music system into this other room with this cassette and
[Amit Varma]: she can dance alone. And that's one escape and other escapes can involve, you know, messing
[Amit Varma]: with the hair or just drawing a lot. Today, kids can just look into the smartphone and
[Amit Varma]: there's endless escape. And I feel that there's both a pro and a con to this. And the pro,
[Amit Varma]: of course, is the escape is endless. And a lot of that escape can also be illumination
[Amit Varma]: where you can realize you're not alone, you can contextualize what you're going through
[Amit Varma]: and make sense of it. All that is great. But at the same time, there's a danger that you
[Amit Varma]: enter this abstract world where you become atomized. You know, you go to a cafe today,
[Amit Varma]: you'll have four people on a table, they're all looking at their phones, they're all lost
[Amit Varma]: in the abstract worlds of their phones and not in the concrete experience of looking
[Amit Varma]: each other in the eye and actually having a conversation. And that's a con, right? And
[Amit Varma]: so, you know, I mean, what's your sense of all of this? Because you've taken the process
[Amit Varma]: of examining this past a time that no longer exists. You know, does it fill you with a
[Amit Varma]: certain kind of sadness that it's all gone? Or because a lot of that time was so unpleasant
[Amit Varma]: and you're like, okay, we are in a better place today. And as a writer, you know, are
[Amit Varma]: you trying to preserve that memory of the past? You know, and you've also spoken about
[Amit Varma]: the importance of therapy in your life. Is it also about getting past it? You know, how
[Amit Varma]: do for example, therapy and writing play into each other? Another question, I know I'm just
[Amit Varma]: throwing a lot at you, but just kind of thinking aloud on these issues, you know, how does
[Amit Varma]: one relate to the past and the way our lives have changed and so on?
[Guest]: See, regarding the phones, we didn't have mobile phones in Kashmir till I think 2003
[Guest]: or 2004. And when the mobile phones came in, it was almost like telling the other person,
[Guest]: say, you left home for the whole of 90s, and you didn't know whether you were going to
[Guest]: come back alive. But this is finally a gadget that allowed you to be accessible. And it
[Guest]: took away a lot of anxiety and paranoia about let's say, if there was a blast somewhere,
[Guest]: there was something, you could phone the person, you could call them and check if they were
[Guest]: okay. So for me, accessing phone was like that. And even when I'm home, I rarely check
[Guest]: internet, I almost regress back into that time, I'll either read, and my phone is always
[Guest]: in the other room on charge or somewhere. Personally, I just feel like there's a use
[Guest]: for it. And for some reason, I maybe I'm stuck in that time. I just use it for that particular,
[Guest]: wherever I am, if I'm in Delhi or outside Kashmir, Srinagar or somewhere else. I'll
[Guest]: use it for that particular, whatever I needed to use it for, whether for work or to access
[Guest]: social media. But when I'm home, it's almost like I want to preserve that because so much
[Guest]: was lost in that time. I don't want to deviate too much from that time. It's trying to hold
[Guest]: on to certain things. Because I think other than people, culture, and these artefacts
[Guest]: that you spoke about, and you spoke about your own experience, they also anchor your
[Guest]: being. They're very important, we may not realise it, because they might just look very
[Guest]: mundane and like coated in stuff in the house. But they're also objects of comfort, they're
[Guest]: also objects of sometimes good memories. So in fact, when you were talking, I was trying
[Guest]: to remember the brand for that newer one, which doesn't register because it was like
[Guest]: a modern item which came home. The older one was Panasonic. So it was almost suddenly,
[Guest]: you know, there's this comfort with that particular, but there is with that brand, but there is
[Guest]: also, I mean, of course, that's a completely different subject, like what being on phones
[Guest]: constantly is doing to us and our lives and our brains. But back home, I also feel like,
[Guest]: especially when I look at my parents, they're on their phones more than I am. They'll be
[Guest]: constantly on Facebook or watching something, or YouTube. And they're constantly living
[Guest]: there. So while I may have some distance sometimes by travel or work from what's happened during
[Guest]: those years, it's sometimes maybe good, like a respite for them to break away from memories,
[Guest]: which are not always pleasant. So again, like I said, it's debatable, especially when you're
[Guest]: in that, when you're in areas which have seen, which have had such histories, it sometimes
[Guest]: does work in your favor. I remember recently, my niece is, I keep talking about my niece,
[Guest]: it's almost like I see, I like I watch her and observe how her life is panning out. She
[Guest]: watches a lot of DIY videos on YouTube. Sometimes she'll look at music videos. So she tries
[Guest]: to look at that. And I remember a few months ago, there was this, during one of those horrible
[Guest]: periods of target killings, there was this Sikh teacher who was killed. I think it was
[Guest]: Supender Kaur. And I was video calling my sister and my niece was like, behind her and
[Guest]: she kept saying, tell her, bolo into school. I said, what does she, I mean, does she want
[Guest]: something? And she's like, no, you read about that killing. She was her friend's mother.
[Guest]: So for a child to process that, and only that would have been, I don't know what her mental
[Guest]: state would be later, but to have something to deviate or distract from, it's sometimes,
[Guest]: to be honest, a blessing in such situations. I mean, in urban reality, it's completely
[Guest]: a different subject, but for her to even have that respite, but she wanted to share that
[Guest]: information with me. She did. And then to see something, look at something else to,
[Guest]: for her own sanity, I'm sure it'll all come out somewhere at some point in her life. It's
[Guest]: not something that she'll be able to deal with by looking at a video. But, you know,
[Guest]: you feel sad for that young kid, 10 year old to have deal with this kind of world as well.
[Guest]: Phones also like, before mobile phones came in, phones were a constant source of anxiety,
[Guest]: like those wired phones, because you didn't know what news phones brought. And phones
[Guest]: were, I think the relationship with phones has always been like, you want to get some
[Guest]: information or you're given unpleasant information. And most of the times phones just didn't work.
[Guest]: Those phones, and you would always see a lineman walking on that, on those walls and trying
[Guest]: to fix things. So it was a funny memory, but phones just didn't work. And that, in fact,
[Guest]: in the book I mentioned about my first crush, and he used to study in Bangalore, and sometimes
[Guest]: they were allowed once a week calls, but there was no way he could phone me from his hostel
[Guest]: because they hardly worked. So there's a strange relationship with technology. And to be honest,
[Guest]: most societies see this as a part of modernity or modernity being introduced to them, technology
[Guest]: and other gadgets coming into being. When I examine and when I look back, we were introduced
[Guest]: to modernity by the most sophisticated weapons being used around. So one doesn't even associate
[Guest]: modernity with phones or technology or development or evolution. You know, we always now, or
[Guest]: for the book also, when I had to research what kind of different vehicles were there,
[Guest]: what kind of guns were used, you just read things which no child should have ever been
[Guest]: subjected to. So, yeah, these are like little utilitarian devices.
[Amit Varma]: I enjoyed a chapter where you spoke about that crush and the boy Wasim, and there also
[Amit Varma]: an artifact is involved, like the reason it all falls apart is a post office burns down
[Amit Varma]: and you have no way of communicating with each other, right? And the post office also
[Amit Varma]: is such an artifact and also, you know, so resonant in different ways. Did you ever meet
[Guest]: Wasim again?
[Guest]: Yes, I mean, because we were distant relatives. So yeah, he's married with two children now.
[Guest]: But yeah, again, there were lots of letters which I couldn't post, but I kept writing
[Guest]: for the longest time. And I think it's that extension of the journal of maybe a different
[Guest]: way of writing. So it was almost like, and a lot of boys were sent out to study at that
[Guest]: point. So I don't know, when I look back and think it's almost like telling someone who
[Guest]: is a part of your community, your society, your life. It's like those letters, almost
[Guest]: like telling them that we also existed because it was a media dark decade and phones not
[Guest]: working with post office burning down. How do you then communicate? And then you then
[Guest]: write those letters. And a lot of times, letters used to, I clearly remember, it used to take
[Guest]: about 22 days to reach either side. And I think there were some letters which would
[Guest]: reach me after he would come for a...
[Guest]: You mentioned that happened once.
[Guest]: Yeah, once. And I remember when a couple of times he came and there was curfew. I recently
[Guest]: remember speaking to a much younger friend of mine, I think he's just 30. And he said,
[Guest]: how did you keep in touch? The phones didn't work or when let's say he was around. I said,
[Guest]: it was expected there would be 30 minute deal or curfew, like basically relaxation of curfew
[Guest]: for 30 minutes. And I'd be like, yeah, I would be at a particular place. And I knew he would
[Guest]: come on his father's scooter. So today's generation is just like, it's like some kind of telepathy.
[Guest]: And to be honest, it's not very long ago either. It's not like we're talking about 70s, but
[Guest]: that place, yeah, it's, it's, it has changed. It hasn't changed. It has changed in some
[Guest]: strange way sometimes. There are also like markers of childhood, which no longer exist.
[Guest]: There used to be, I remember coming back from school, there used to be a snacks person,
[Guest]: Matar Chole used to be like, shout on top of his voice. And I don't remember seeing
[Guest]: him after that. There was a guy in the mornings because it was completely replaced by curfew.
[Guest]: He used to carry this, he used to carry water in sheepskin, this huge bag. And when I read
[Guest]: Chino Achebe's Things Fall Apart, and they have that bag where they actually store wine
[Guest]: in that. And it reminded me of that guy. And it's like, where did he go? He and he was
[Guest]: just sprinkle the roads with water. That was his job in the morning. I don't remember seeing
[Guest]: him. And that completely has changed. There was a Shehnaiwala who used to come on Eid.
[Guest]: Don't remember him, seeing him for like 20-25 years. So they become a part of your memory
[Guest]: and then they become these, I don't know, these markers of your identity and you just
[Guest]: don't know what to do with them because one day they were there and then they just suddenly
[Guest]: disappeared. So, I don't know, it does something to your being and you're trying to, while
[Guest]: processing what happened, also trying to construct pieces of yourself together and hence therapy.
[Guest]: Because I did study psychology, so I used to think, oh, I'm going to learn from the
[Guest]: books and I don't need it. Until you actually get into one and then you realise how important.
[Guest]: I had knee pain in my left knee, which turned out, after many sessions, it was psychosomatic
[Guest]: more than it was anything to do with the knee. And I'd had it for 17-18 years. So there was
[Guest]: an incident during firing, like I was caught in it and it was, so we were in a market,
[Guest]: it was in 98, there was a blast and my family was exactly near the spot of the blast, outside
[Guest]: of the blast. I was slightly further away and I couldn't, my knees became extremely
[Guest]: shaky, I couldn't walk, they started trembling. I couldn't walk properly for like two weeks.
[Guest]: And then left knee sort of retained that trauma. And every time I would walk fast or take stairs,
[Guest]: it would hurt till I spoke about it at length and I broke down in therapy. And I haven't
[Guest]: had any knee issues in my left knee ever since. So yeah, like psychosomatic, then you realise
[Guest]: what therapy can actually do to your body. Because you don't know which part of your
[Guest]: body traps trauma. So it was just not psychological, but it was actually physiological. I mean,
[Guest]: I have a couple of, this might be TMI, but congenital heart conditions. And before writing
[Guest]: this book, I used to struggle with breathing all the time. And even at Reuters, I was hospitalised
[Guest]: a couple of times from work. But after writing and tying a lot of knots in terms of reliving
[Guest]: those memories, writing about them, that has set a record in the last three, four years
[Guest]: also. So, you know, how your mental, psychological wellbeing or lack of it can impact how you
[Guest]: are on the whole is something that we, again, don't talk about enough.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned letters sometimes taking 22 days to reach and so on and so forth. And
[Amit Varma]: what that would do, and I'm thinking aloud here, is that would force you to write a different
[Amit Varma]: kind of letter than the terse instrumental emails we would send today, you know, is going
[Amit Varma]: to reach 22 days later. So you're not going to talk about something that is current, like,
[Amit Varma]: oh, I have a headache or whatever, or oh, can you do this for me? Because obviously,
[Amit Varma]: 22 days is too late. And instead, there would be like one, the letters would be longer,
[Amit Varma]: they'd be properly written. Just looking back on the letters I wrote to my parents and to
[Amit Varma]: friends and all of that when you know, in the letter writing days, you know, you'd be
[Amit Varma]: putting more of yourself in it, it would be more of a considered act. And I think and
[Amit Varma]: I'm wondering if that can have two kinds of impact in the sense that today, most of our
[Amit Varma]: communication is instrumental, right? Because if I'm writing to a friend, I can write to
[Amit Varma]: them anytime I can send them a WhatsApp message, you know, I can if I'm busy, I'll just like
[Amit Varma]: put a you know, a thumbs up mark to indicate leave me alone, I've read it, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But earlier, there was different and it was different, one with regard to what it did
[Amit Varma]: for yourself, because a longer letter means you're thinking more, you're putting more
[Amit Varma]: thought into it, you're examining yourself more, as it were, kind of like journaling,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you can also shape yourself with it. And the other is that there is something
[Amit Varma]: more than to those relationships when two people are writing to each other, whether
[Amit Varma]: it's a romantic relationship or otherwise, you are, you know, just the act of writing
[Amit Varma]: a long letter like that to someone is just saying, I care about you, I want your attention,
[Amit Varma]: right? And you're putting more of yourself out there. It's a deeper connection. Today,
[Amit Varma]: a couple wooing or meeting on Tinder or whatever, might be performing at a shallow level for
[Amit Varma]: each other. But that kind of sharing over an extended period of time doesn't really
[Amit Varma]: happen. So again, I don't know if you've sort of, you know, thought about this, but how
[Amit Varma]: do you feel this aspect of modern life? You know, how do you feel it affects us? Can it
[Amit Varma]: produce a different kind of person, because it is requiring a different kind of interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a different kind of connection?
[Guest]: See, it's two things, essentially. So now, with the advent of internet, we've seen our
[Guest]: behaviours change, right? So having worked in advertising, freelancing, you know, and
[Guest]: if you capture the attention of people, or the target audience, as they're called, in
[Guest]: the first three seconds is when they look at your ad. So the task is to really say something
[Guest]: or grab their attention in three seconds. And this we've seen, it wasn't there till,
[Guest]: I remember seeing this from 2009 onwards. And I was in Singapore, and I remember I had
[Guest]: a French boss, and he and I, we were having lunch. And he said, it'd be interesting to
[Guest]: see 10 years later, where we reach. And sometimes he and I joke, and we're like, we are actually
[Guest]: completely different beings. Do you remember having that conversation? And he's still that
[Guest]: laid back guy who would, you know, have that two hour lunch and sit and have a glass of
[Guest]: wine with it. But so now everyone, like people who, you know how you have classifications
[Guest]: like native, digital natives and digital migrants. So now we are seeing the generation of digital
[Guest]: natives from whom this is, Tinder is the normal way of meeting people. And investing in relationships
[Guest]: is all, it's not only on Tinder or on dating sites, but overall, like their relationship
[Guest]: with anything in their lives is as, I wouldn't say superficial, but compared to what we had,
[Guest]: we just put in a lot of ourselves in how in those letter writing days. So this is a completely
[Guest]: different thing with which has to do with more with technology and what internet has
[Guest]: done. I feel like, let's say, if I didn't grow up in Srinagar, in Kashmir, during those
[Guest]: years that I grew up in, would I write those kind of letters to someone? Or would I sort
[Guest]: of hold back? You know, you don't know whether the person you're writing to would come back
[Guest]: and find you alive. So there is that always, I mean, if you've grown up there in the 90s,
[Guest]: this was a chief concern that you may or may not come back home alive, everyone who left
[Guest]: in the morning, and there used to be curfew at 5.30, and you had to come home before that.
[Guest]: So for the longest time, again, I had this anxiety about around dusk, and it was that
[Guest]: coming home and being somewhere safe. It's almost like, I don't know, recording or telling
[Guest]: them that you existed and what, like you rightly said, there was no immediate detail in that,
[Guest]: but it was, you, I wrote a lot of amateur poems at that point, I think, which was, which
[Guest]: I thankfully don't do anymore. But trying to convey feelings in different ways, I feel,
[Guest]: and also telling them of like larger plans, or things or events, rather than, like you
[Guest]: rightly said, you can't just talk about immediate stuff around you. But you wanted to lose a
[Guest]: lot of people around that period. So, I mean, I don't have access to that particular note.
[Guest]: I remember looking at it, because I did look at those letters. Much later, we had floods
[Guest]: in 2014, in Kashmir, and I remember Wasim's house was impacted by the floods quite a bit.
[Guest]: They lost their house. And apparently, the only things that he saved were those letters.
[Guest]: So he actually, and he's happily married with children right now, but it's like a part of
[Guest]: your being from that time. Because again, like I said, things could have gone either
[Guest]: way, to sort of being grateful that they still survived and the person you were with survived.
[Guest]: I feel that act of preserving those letters and letting them dry in a hall upstairs was
[Guest]: almost like being grateful for having survived those years. I remember I was telling this
[Guest]: cousin of mine who was killed during Eid, and he was caught in crossfiring. I mean,
[Guest]: that must have produced a survivor guilt in me as a child that I probably wasn't aware
[Guest]: of till much later, till I actually read and knew what survivor guilt even meant. So it's
[Guest]: almost like, I don't know, I see that now as not as like some mad love or passion that
[Guest]: he had, but it was almost like that gratitude that he was able to save something from a
[Guest]: time which changed so with such rapidity and we lost so much.
[Guest]: So those letters were more than just the letters. It's like a part of the time, a part of you,
[Guest]: a part of a record that you existed and lived on much more. And again, if thinking of if
[Guest]: I were to grow up, if I had grown up, let's say, in Singapore, and rather than having
[Guest]: studied there, would I have, would they mean so much then? But I think it's a particular
[Guest]: time and place, I feel.
[Amit Varma]: So let's take a quick commercial break. And on the other side of the break, we'll, you
[Amit Varma]: know, dive in a little deeper into your book and your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST,
[Amit Varma]: or about $150 and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being
[Amit Varma]: a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Farah Bashir. And during the
[Amit Varma]: break, you went on Instagram, and you found this excellent letter that you wrote to your
[Amit Varma]: crush when you were 17 years old. And you volunteered to kind of read out that little
[Amit Varma]: bit for us. You know, as an extension of my earlier question about whether, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the nature of our communication has changed the things we say.
[Guest]: Yeah, it was now, when I had access to those letters, because I had lost mine, he hadn't.
[Guest]: We spoke about he had preserved his and he rescued them during the floods. There was
[Guest]: this one particular that struck me and I Instagrammed it last year. The note says, the story of
[Guest]: love is not important. What is important is that one is capable of love. It is perhaps
[Guest]: the only glimpse we are permitted at eternity. Beautiful. And you were 17 when you wrote
[Guest]: this?
[Guest]: I was 17. And again, that it makes me think of what your question was earlier, like, what
[Guest]: you asked, that if that communication was really not about the letters, but was to capture
[Guest]: something bigger than just what was happening around oneself. It's almost like you, your
[Guest]: childhood gets truncated, you're swiftly forced into adulthood and your adolescence is gone.
[Guest]: It's almost like you have to sound or you have to just embrace that the reality of life
[Guest]: that this is how it's going to be and you can't afford to be playful. Otherwise, a 17
[Guest]: year old to think about things like what love is and what life is and what eternity is,
[Guest]: I don't really know if that's normal.
[Amit Varma]: No, I like that little bit. I mean, I was also writing about lofty things at that age,
[Amit Varma]: but in terribly pretentious, flowery language from what little I can remember. So there's
[Guest]: a certain amount of maturity in that little bit, which I was surprised by.
[Guest]: I didn't think I was, I thought maybe, I mean, I used to study books, read books and because
[Guest]: that's what one did when there was long, curfewed nights. So you just read. And I thought maybe
[Guest]: I just, that's how I used to write that poetry at one time. I mean, I used to get like obsessed
[Guest]: with writing and there was once I was reading Shakespeare sonnets and I found, now you know
[Guest]: the term misogyny, but at that point I got angry at how he had described the girls of
[Guest]: a woman. So I started writing a rebuttal to Shakespeare. So I thought I probably was writing
[Guest]: useless, mindless things like that. But this gives you a glimpse into something, the sentiment
[Guest]: from that decade was rather dark.
[Amit Varma]: Rebuttal to Shakespeare would be most excellent. You know, and I'm just thinking aloud, you
[Amit Varma]: spoke of childhood being truncated and, you know, earlier you spoke about how if you left
[Amit Varma]: home, you didn't know whether you'd come back. That's your tension every morning, right?
[Amit Varma]: And that can grow you up really fast. And I wonder, you know, looking back in the past,
[Amit Varma]: you'll see people who've done incredibly great things when they're like 20, 25, like, and
[Amit Varma]: I'm looking back at myself at 20, 25 and thinking, but a possible reason for that is that life
[Amit Varma]: expectancy until very recently was pretty low. If you're expected to die at 40, 45,
[Amit Varma]: you basically have to force yourself to be a full adult. By the time you're 20, you're
[Amit Varma]: having kids really younger than what would be legal right now. And I completely get that.
[Amit Varma]: Like so many of the America's founders were so young, I think Hamilton and all were like
[Amit Varma]: 21, 22, when they were, you know, doing the stuff that they did, or aaj ke bachche abhi,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: I think I say the same thing about Sikandar. Alexander the Great, he died pretty young,
[Guest]: I think in early 30s. But you know, that's one thing, life expectancy is a different
[Guest]: subject, like, you know, by 40, 45 still. But here, I mean, I remember once coming back,
[Guest]: it was, we were going for, I think, one of the exams, it was around October. And three
[Guest]: of us, three friends used to go together to take that exam. And on our way back, the third
[Guest]: friend's father had been killed in a crossfiring. So you're talking about like, she came back
[Guest]: to a dead father. They all had left in the morning, she'd gone to take her exams, he'd
[Guest]: gone to office for work. And by the time he came back, he was just crossing the road to
[Guest]: pick up something, he was caught in a crossfire. The current Vice-Chancellor of Kashmir University,
[Guest]: her father was killed in a grenade blast while coming back home. So these were, your existence
[Guest]: was, life was dotted with these things. So it just makes you think about things very
[Guest]: differently. There's also a chapter in the book where I talk about how my sister who
[Guest]: was pregnant, eight months pregnant, and our parents got caught in crossfiring. And there
[Guest]: was a particular place where I, near Residency Road in Kashmir, they were caught. And one
[Guest]: wouldn't usually dare to, you know, once after a blast, everything is cordoned off. Nobody
[Guest]: in their right frame of mind would actually walk that stretch. And I remember my sister
[Guest]: was crying and on the floor of the shop. And I just like went out to look for them just
[Guest]: to see if they had, because it was such an expected thing that they could have died there
[Guest]: and they could have been killed there. So you almost go and like, want to embrace or
[Guest]: deal with the reality as soon as you can. And it's another thing, like I said, I mean,
[Guest]: what it did later was, it helps you sort of process those years, but when you're in it,
[Guest]: you have no time to even for a second process. I think that again, takes us back to the letter.
[Guest]: So it's like, what was that time? Any reminder of that period, any reminder of the time helps
[Guest]: you make sense of who you are and what became of you today.
[Amit Varma]: And what struck me about the book, because you've chosen the voice of the adolescent
[Amit Varma]: girl at that point in time, is that she's mentioning all these different deaths so casually,
[Amit Varma]: but it's almost as if it's almost sometimes in a matter of fact way, whether it's a second
[Amit Varma]: cousin on in 1989 during Eid, or whether it's, you know, Afi, you know, your cousin, who,
[Amit Varma]: you know, who drops you home. And when he's dropped you home from a wedding that you've
[Amit Varma]: gone for, you write, he smiled his usual effusive smile, his green eyes shown with kindness.
[Amit Varma]: I look back and remember him riding away in his denim jacket. That was the last time I
[Amit Varma]: saw him. He was killed a week later. And then, you know, the narrator talks about how, you
[Amit Varma]: know, after Afi died, his mother was found missing one morning, a couple of mornings
[Amit Varma]: and where was she and the family went looking for him. And she was at his grave trying to
[Amit Varma]: dig him out. And then her father, you know, the mother wasn't kept at home after that.
[Amit Varma]: And her father, his father would look after her. And one day he mistook a window for a
[Amit Varma]: door and plunged to his death. And all this said in such a matter of fact, where you also
[Amit Varma]: speak about your aunt Niloufer, and you know, a young colleague of hers called Tanvir has
[Amit Varma]: his younger sister, and she kind of blesses his younger sister who's going to get married.
[Amit Varma]: And she goes and she leaves a thing and there's a blast and she's gone and they can't even
[Amit Varma]: find a body they identify her by the clothes. You know, and, and what you've kind of done
[Amit Varma]: is that the your narrator is not articulating her grief, you can see it through all these
[Amit Varma]: other things that she does, you sense a loneliness when she dances alone to Nazia and Zohaib,
[Amit Varma]: you sense that reservoir of pain when she's, you know, plucking her hair out and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. But the question is, that, looking back, do people then have no choice, but to steal
[Amit Varma]: themselves against the inevitable deaths around them, that when they know that if my parents
[Amit Varma]: are leaving in the morning, they may not come back in the evening, you know, does it then
[Amit Varma]: become part of your psychological makeup that you just shut off that part of you?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's the same thing, which where one actually thought that my parents probably
[Guest]: were killed in that shootout that day. And I just walked to that site, usually you would
[Guest]: not and you would, normal people would probably have a reaction to it. And I was here, I was
[Guest]: just like walking completely stone faced. It's how you accept that this is going to
[Guest]: happen. What strikes you, I think death is something that everyone has accepted or had
[Guest]: accepted it in the 90s, it was going to come at some point in the day, forget about waiting
[Guest]: for a few years. But small little joys of life, like you rightly pointed out, when they
[Guest]: were taken away, I think that gave more pain. Death was almost seen as this inevitability,
[Guest]: you had no control over, you could be caught, you could be unfortunately. I mean, that cousin,
[Guest]: not cousin, this friend of mine, whose grandmother was killed in front of him, she was opening
[Guest]: the window and a stray bullet comes in and she just dies there. And I had no, I lost
[Guest]: touch with that friend of mine after that. And I had put up a review of the book on Facebook.
[Guest]: Her neighbour had read that, and had read the book. And he gave the whole description
[Guest]: of how she was killed and what happened. So it's like, it's how, you know, how death can
[Guest]: be personal, and everyone has a way to grieve and mourn the loss. But it almost became like
[Guest]: a collective thing, collective mourning, every time someone died, or was killed, or was caught
[Guest]: in crossfiring or blasts. It was like, different deaths started resembling each other. And
[Guest]: then there was this collective loss. And you knew, as time passed, it just felt like it
[Guest]: was one, it was like time loop. I honestly think of 89 as the year of time loop. It,
[Guest]: this year happens over and over and over again, in certain cases. So, there were other things,
[Guest]: which even the book that I'm like, the manuscript I'm currently working on. And this is something
[Guest]: that happened, then we had this transgender help, who was humiliated during a crackdown.
[Guest]: And it was his humiliation. He had a lot of pride otherwise, and he conducted himself
[Guest]: in a very different way. And it was that humiliation, which makes me cry more than, let's say, if
[Guest]: he had died, dead, because it's like the dignity, losing dignity and losing that respect, and
[Guest]: then being turned into nothing. I think that is like a bigger death. And the other one
[Guest]: is it's almost like people have just like accepted. I mean, it's not even a, now if
[Guest]: there's, there are many cases of, cancer is on the rise in Kashmir. Almost every death
[Guest]: now that you hear about, has it, I mean, has one person or the other, like, in the last
[Guest]: three months, I mean, Hina, that's in the book, my sister, she survived a grade four,
[Guest]: stage four cancer recently. And so, it's become so prevalent. And it's again, the, what keeps
[Guest]: you on is the treatment. But, if you sort of die, I mean, if it's not, I mean, that's
[Guest]: sort of accepted as a fact that you have, you can't do much about it. And yeah, it's
[Guest]: a strange relationship with death and life. It's, I think it essentially boils down to
[Guest]: dignity in both. Lesser pain, less, I mean, it's almost seen as a blessing, if you were
[Guest]: to go and just go like that, rather than being subjected to other things which can happen
[Guest]: to you, there could be an enforced disappearance, like, there would be, you wouldn't know where
[Guest]: your family member was. So, yeah, and death as a blessing sometimes, at least the body
[Guest]: is home, you're seeing it, you're burying it with dignity. That also, it also impacts
[Guest]: your life later, in terms of how you're not afraid to lose people. As, you know, when
[Guest]: you interact with people in general, and I remember talking about this with my therapist
[Guest]: quite a bit, like, the loss is, can be abrupt. It can be, you know, you will not talk to
[Guest]: the other person for the rest of your life, let's say, if you were to lose someone for
[Guest]: whatever reasons. So, it stems from that, that endings are so abrupt and sudden. It
[Guest]: again, you know, it boils down to the same question of mental health, like how it changes
[Guest]: you as a person, how growing up or living in war, you can never be the same person,
[Amit Varma]: and that you were before it.
[Amit Varma]: One of the saddest stories in your book, at least for me, was not really about a death,
[Amit Varma]: death per se, though it no doubt involved a death, but it was about this lady called
[Amit Varma]: Rajmas, I hope I'm pronouncing that right, Rajmas, who basically, she had three daughters,
[Amit Varma]: she wanted a son really badly. She prayed and she did whatever to this Baba Rishi person
[Amit Varma]: and was deeply grateful when she was blessed with a son called Javed. And of course, he
[Amit Varma]: was the apple of her eye, so to say, and then when he was 16 years old, he just vanished,
[Amit Varma]: taken away by security forces. And then she does all kinds of things, but she never finds
[Amit Varma]: him obviously, because we can guess what happened. And that feels worse than a death, because
[Amit Varma]: if there is a death, if someone, you know, dies in an incident, you can at least say
[Amit Varma]: that okay, the bomb exploded, but they would not have felt any pain, there would have been
[Amit Varma]: no suffering. But one, when there's suffering, it's, you know, you can vicariously feel it
[Amit Varma]: too. And two, just not knowing must be such a torture and my, so I, you know, at one level
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud, I think this is sort of a very concentrated, amplified version of something
[Amit Varma]: that we do anyway in our lives, right? We know we're going to die, we are all going
[Amit Varma]: to die. But we live in denial of it, we live as if we are going to live forever, which
[Amit Varma]: is why I had those carbs for lunch. And we manage our memory and our responses to just
[Amit Varma]: deal with this thing. And in a very concentrated and amplified way, it seems that those qualities
[Amit Varma]: kind of come to the fore. But my question is this, and this is a question that for example,
[Amit Varma]: I was someone like Hussain Haidri when he was on the show, in a larger context of what
[Amit Varma]: is happening in India today. That, you know, these deaths aren't deaths, they're murders,
[Amit Varma]: right? And when this is happening to you, I can understand how you deal with the grief
[Amit Varma]: and you've spoken about some of that. How do you deal with the anger? Right? Like, the
[Amit Varma]: question I asked Hussain specifically was, how the hell and you know, we are painting
[Amit Varma]: with broad strokes here, but how the hell have the Muslims of India been so tolerant,
[Amit Varma]: when there is so much anti Muslim hatred all around them expressing itself every day, and
[Amit Varma]: really just getting worse every week, right? It's almost reached boiling point. And yet
[Amit Varma]: there has been, barring stray incidents, there hasn't been that kind of response. Like what
[Amit Varma]: I imagine is that if I was in Kashmir, and my brother vanished one day, and I don't know
[Amit Varma]: what happened to him, or my sister was blinded by a pellet, or worse, right, I would be filled
[Amit Varma]: with rage. But I don't see that rage. And is the absence of that rage, the suppressing
[Amit Varma]: of that rage coming from some kind of a practical understanding that we have to live in this
[Amit Varma]: world? And the odds are against us? What is the point of rage? Or I don't understand what
[Amit Varma]: is going on here. And in a similar context, you know, earlier, you said you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: horrible things being done to some women. I you know, every episode I've done on women
[Amit Varma]: in India, it just strikes me that horrible things are done to all women. You know, the
[Amit Varma]: kind of things the kind of lives that women lead in India. Again, I don't get that. Why
[Amit Varma]: isn't there more rage? I think I asked both Nilanjana Roy and Urvashi Bhutalia, this in
[Amit Varma]: the episodes I did with them, and they gave, you know, different kinds of insights on this.
[Amit Varma]: But just in a broader question, whether you're a Muslim minority, whether you are a resident
[Amit Varma]: in a place which is occupied by the military, in the sort of way that Kashmir has been,
[Amit Varma]: or whether you are facing this kind of social violence and otherization, you know, how do
[Amit Varma]: you deal with the rage?
[Guest]: See, this is something that was in the 90s, again, going back in Kashmir, especially in
[Guest]: the first four years, you thought anything was possible, the way you know, I'm talking
[Guest]: about when Rubaiya Saeed was kidnapped, and then she was released, and the militants were
[Guest]: released and the government of India sort of allowed that at that point. And I remember
[Guest]: we had this India Today at home, and my dad had it, and there were some neighbours, etc,
[Guest]: would come in, and they said they were locating themselves on the cover page. So you thought
[Guest]: anything was possible in that time. And then the intelligence and the strategy of the state
[Guest]: started getting more and more robust, and you realized the sentiment at that point didn't
[Guest]: last for too long. And then there was insertion of Ikhwan, which is counterinsurgent militia,
[Guest]: which broke Kashmiri society. I mean, brother couldn't trust his or her own brother. So
[Guest]: rage only gets you. It's a long battle, you know, right now, whether women, I mean, forget
[Guest]: about whether in a conflict zone or not, the men of South Asia or women overall, I mean,
[Guest]: I was a few months ago doing a project for gender equality, and you see, I mean, you
[Guest]: think of all the West, and you think of probably women having better lives. One, like, there
[Guest]: are three murders committed, or three women are killed by their intimate partners in the
[Guest]: UK every week. So we're even talking about all the, like, women at large, but it's, and
[Guest]: now, in the last few years, there has been some kind of solidarity, some kind of sisterhood,
[Guest]: far more prominent than it used to be earlier, which feels rage, how far will rage get you?
[Guest]: I mean, rage has to be within rather than as it being an expression. Because then you
[Guest]: are just giving everything away, and you can be easily targeted. And that's what we've
[Guest]: seen what's happening on social media as well. Sometimes, people get arrested for tweets,
[Guest]: and we'll get, so it's like giving an excuse. So you just find ways, it's far more important
[Guest]: to sort of survive that moment. I used to sometimes tweet quite a bit, and tweet completely
[Guest]: opposite to what government was doing back home. And I had friends, like, literally,
[Guest]: if something would happen, and they would be like, do not, because, you know, it's like,
[Guest]: you are giving them evidence on a platter to profile you. So then how do you, people
[Guest]: are finding different ways to express that, like Shaheen Bagh, for example, went on for
[Guest]: as long as it did as this proper protest. And you will remember that moment in history,
[Guest]: rather than one person acting on it, or a bunch of people working, acting on it, and
[Guest]: it turning into, so that's become like a movement of our times, right, really. And hopefully,
[Guest]: to fight violence, to fight the aggressions of the state, there'll be, I know it's difficult,
[Guest]: but it's when you are talking about this point, when you were making this point, I kept thinking
[Guest]: of how sabr, or patience, is such an extolled virtue, and I think back home it was really
[Guest]: that. I used to go, I often go to shrines, that's how I've been brought up. I may not
[Guest]: be overtly religious, but I do, I find a lot of peace, just sitting in a dargah, and just
[Guest]: not even praying. And sometimes, I mean, not sometimes, often I would find myself in a
[Guest]: shrine on Sanwar in Srinagar, and all I would do there was just cry, and nothing else. And
[Guest]: it was almost like, you know, you just have to be patient, and things will become better.
[Guest]: So I think that's what's happening in, I mean, Muslims in India, they have their own struggles.
[Guest]: I think it's probably gaining some strength from that. But I, from my experience, the
[Guest]: 90s was a lot of that, or for example, where there's this chapter I talk about, tiny knots
[Guest]: of faith. That's also buying that time, not losing your mind, that is father going to
[Guest]: come back alive or not? So tying that knot, so that you sort of negotiate a little more
[Guest]: space for you to not completely break down. And, you know, there's always this hope that
[Guest]: things will get better, I feel.
[Amit Varma]: Structurally, in your book, you've kind of structured it around your grandmother's death
[Amit Varma]: and her funeral. But the pivotal point in that whole narrative is, of course, the Day
[Amit Varma]: of Eid in 1989, and what happened there. So tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: That was, you know, it was, I mean, it sort of boils down to the title of the book, Rumours
[Guest]: of Spring. You're 13, and you're imagining a life for yourself, and you're going to get
[Guest]: a haircut for the first time at a proper salon and not getting it from your father's barber.
[Guest]: So it was, it was, it turned out to be a big rumour. Like, if you were, I mean, I was drawn
[Guest]: to this phrase by Agha Shahid Ali's poem, from Agha Shahid Ali's poem. But it was essentially
[Guest]: that, you know, sometimes something, I mean, I told you, like I was telling you earlier,
[Guest]: I discarded two manuscripts before this, but the title stayed. So it was that, and in an
[Guest]: hour when your life changes, you've managed a bargain, and you're going for a haircut.
[Guest]: And by the time you come out, you're extremely fearful, and your entire personality changes,
[Guest]: your reality changes. It just does damage at levels that, which sort of you realise
[Guest]: much later what it has done. And everything changes, right? So I had a Kashmiri Pandit
[Guest]: friend, Renuka Bazar, I've still not been able to find her on social media, nowhere.
[Guest]: She and I used to have this, this tug in the classroom about who's going to get the highest
[Guest]: marks. And after, I didn't see her in, I only saw her in the winter of 89. I didn't see
[Guest]: her in from 90s onwards. My grades fell, I didn't know, and my parents didn't know what
[Guest]: was going on. So I lost interest in studies, I didn't care about it, and something or the
[Guest]: other would happen. And I mean, I remember, I used to get like good percentage and my
[Guest]: report card used to be circulated amongst our, we lived in a nuclear family, but it
[Guest]: was part of a joint setup, like cluster of houses. And I remember my report card used
[Guest]: to leave home in the morning, and then, you know, go to every household, but then there
[Guest]: was nothing really to, I mean, from 97%, I've straightaway dropped to 65, or 60 sometimes.
[Guest]: So I mean, it just hits you at multiple levels, from psychologically to emotional to, and
[Guest]: then, and most of the things you can't even articulate at that age.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, and the specific events that you described, of course, as you walk, you're
[Amit Varma]: walking home after the haircut, and there's been that violence, there are shards of glass
[Amit Varma]: and plastic on the road, you describe your fear so well, and just a relief everybody
[Amit Varma]: feels when you get home, because you're alive, because there were rumours that a 12 year
[Amit Varma]: old girl from the school had been killed. And yeah, that's what ends up after that,
[Amit Varma]: being what we would today in our cliched jargon, call the new normal. Because through the book,
[Amit Varma]: I found all of these things, which have been normalised. So they're taken for granted.
[Amit Varma]: And yes, yet, you get a sense of what they are doing to the little girl. For example,
[Amit Varma]: there is the constant curfew that is going on. And it's a curfew that is, technically,
[Amit Varma]: it's a curfew outside the house. But in some ways, it is also a curfew inside the house.
[Amit Varma]: Right? And it just changes the texture of life completely. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: that. Like, was it? Did you think of it as something normal? Okay, sab ke saath hota
[Amit Varma]: hai at that time? Or was the fact that you had lived through non curfew times, you know,
[Amit Varma]: something that made it just seem like this horrible nightmare? When will it help? So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in that continuum, kind of where was this? What was it like?
[Guest]: Curfews were sort of part of even before 89. So we had that election rigging, which led
[Guest]: eventually led to insurgency. This was 87, 88. In fact, we had this chief minister called
[Guest]: Gulam Ahmed Shah, we used to call him Gul Shah. And he, in his time, there was, I think,
[Guest]: curfew around the clock. And he earned this epithet, Gul Karfi, which is curfew. So, in
[Guest]: fact, there is a senior journalist, I wouldn't like to name her. But so she talks about she
[Guest]: writes about Kashmir. And I don't know who has played this prank. But someone has translated
[Guest]: Gul Karfi, Gul meaning flower and translated Gul Karfi as the flower of curfew. So someone
[Guest]: has really been cheeky and gave her the wrong translation. But he was like his name is Gulam
[Guest]: Ahmed Shah. So Gul Karfi sort of, in my consciousness, we had a lot, we were indoors the whole time.
[Guest]: It was, again, this thing about things will change. And you were always hearing what was
[Guest]: going on. And there was something or the other happening. There were demonstrations, there
[Guest]: were killings. So you felt sort of safe at home. But you were also, it was, it was literally
[Guest]: if I were to explain it, it was like you were holding your breath for longer chunks till
[Guest]: one day gets over, then another day gets over. And then it becomes your life before you know
[Guest]: it. And some behaviours during the lockdown actually came back, which was I just like
[Guest]: naturally slipped into them. So like not even, I mean, during the curfew, I used to just
[Guest]: sit in one spot and just be there the whole time. I won't even get up. And that sort of
[Guest]: came back during the lockdown again. So it was, it's like, you're always waiting. It's
[Guest]: an endless wait. And you can't do anything about it. And you're always hyper alert, especially
[Guest]: in curfew, but sometimes, let's say, the troops would run after young boys, mischievous, I
[Guest]: mean, they would just like try to sneak out of the house and they would catch them and
[Guest]: they would just run after them. Even if there's no killing involved, you know, you're like
[Guest]: constantly, you know, when there's curfew, as we've seen in the lockdown as well, this
[Guest]: is eerie silence that sets on on the day as well. And that's not normal at all. And your
[Guest]: body can sense that. So you're constantly in a state of uncertainty, anxiety, like on
[Guest]: the edge, which, I mean, something I still can't get used to. I mean, I don't know about
[Guest]: others. But when I was home, I mean, I just came back in the summer, there were a couple
[Guest]: of a couple of weeks where there was curfew for two, three days. I think there was once
[Guest]: during Yassin Malik's hearing. It was always like we were watching news, you were listening
[Guest]: to news, hoping that it'll get over. There's something that that's suffocating about it.
[Guest]: And you feel like, yeah, it's claustrophobic. And you just, I don't know if I'll ever get
[Guest]: used to certain things like curfew or, or constantly being under the shadow of a gun.
[Guest]: And like, you're walking, you're driving past and suddenly you have like this nice breeze
[Guest]: on your face and suddenly you see a big bunker. And then that's it. You just forget what you
[Guest]: were. I mean, you're suddenly hyper alert and you're like, suddenly in a very different
[Guest]: zone and in a very different reality altogether. Yeah, I mean, it's a dream sometimes one would
[Guest]: even like enjoy home the way it's shown to be enjoyed, you know, this paradise, but doesn't
[Guest]: happen really.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, one of the one of the powerful passages in your book is about how you have periods
[Amit Varma]: and you've run out of your anti-spasmodic medicine, but you're terrified because there's
[Amit Varma]: curfew outside. And, you know, even if you go on tiptoe, the floor will creak because
[Amit Varma]: wooden and all of that, and you're just scared to go for medicine inside your own house.
[Amit Varma]: And so you just lie on that bed and endure the pain, which seems the whole thing seems
[Amit Varma]: like such a powerful sort of metaphor for what's going on. And it's not even paranoid.
[Amit Varma]: Like you pointed out, your grandmother of your friend opens a bedroom window, bam, bullet
[Amit Varma]: in there. Bunkers are another thing that you know, a person like me when I was growing
[Amit Varma]: up, privileged childhood, I never felt anything when I saw a bunker. And it was sort of illuminating
[Amit Varma]: to read in your book about what a bunker can do, what a bunker can just a sight of a bunker
[Amit Varma]: can do to a person. Like there is this brilliant, you know, stretch, which is, you know, almost
[Amit Varma]: like a short story in itself. You talk about a lady called Halima and these people put
[Amit Varma]: a bunker outside a house and she's absolutely terrified because her daughter Anjum is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, young, she's more or less your age. She's terrified the girl isn't allowed to
[Amit Varma]: go out anywhere. You know, the husband who's an elderly man who's most of the time home
[Amit Varma]: because his grocery shop is you know, can't really operate in curfew. He has to accompany
[Amit Varma]: it anytime she has to do and there is this constant fear. And the ending of this is where
[Amit Varma]: one day at night she hears a gunshot and she's scared what happened and somebody in the bunker
[Amit Varma]: shot himself. And this is such an incredible story because in that moment, where I was
[Amit Varma]: inside the head of Halima and empathizing with Anjum and Anjum's dad and all that, you
[Amit Varma]: suddenly catch a glimpse of a human being on the other side also. And I found it so
[Amit Varma]: powerful and you also spoke about how bunkers became landmarks like people will say hey,
[Amit Varma]: there's a house, they live in the house next to the small bunker or, you know, the lane
[Amit Varma]: before the large bunker, and all of that. And is it? Did it remain constant like that
[Amit Varma]: through the years? Was it only that there are periods when they were sort of bunkers
[Amit Varma]: and all of that was happening? Did they remain constant like that? And was the threat more
[Amit Varma]: in the fear of what could happen? The sort of the mythical fear that a bunker would have
[Amit Varma]: aroused rather than stuff that actually happened? I mean, how was all that playing out?
[Guest]: I mean, now there are fewer bunkers because then there was, I can't remember whether it
[Guest]: was Mehbooba Mufti's time or Umar Abdullah's time that they removed some. But my point
[Guest]: at that piece of news was it, the troops are still as many in number, which is around 700,000.
[Guest]: So that hasn't come down, which means these bunkers can spring up again. And in the 90s,
[Guest]: they were like one every few hundred meters, maybe, and quite a few. And when you're walking
[Guest]: past a bunker, you as a woman, you feel like you didn't exist. It's extreme. So there is
[Guest]: a gaze. There is, of course, there is fear. There's this fear of what if a grenade is
[Guest]: lobbed in my direction? And I remember there was this particular instance where me and
[Guest]: my cousin were walking back from our high secondary school. We were in Lal Chowk. And
[Guest]: we were walking next to a bunker, near a bunker. And she held my hand and she was like, she's
[Guest]: like some, I don't know, there's something at the back. So we didn't know what it was.
[Guest]: Turned out it was a cow at her shoulder. But those five seconds, we were both like, are
[Guest]: we going to get killed? Like what happened? Did someone grab us from behind near the bunker?
[Guest]: What we supposed to be? Are we where we are not supposed to be? So real fear attached
[Guest]: to them, extreme anxiety. And I'm like a child forever looking at, even now when I'm home,
[Guest]: just looking at, at least now I can look at a bunker. There was a time, especially after
[Guest]: Bob was like, why do you know what a bunker looks like? She thought that this is something
[Guest]: that you wouldn't look at. And I remember initially, like maybe in early 2000s, I had
[Guest]: a couple of friends who had gone to Kashmir, or maybe 2004. And this friend was in Delhi
[Guest]: and he was like, he almost had a fight with someone in the bunker. Because he said like
[Guest]: the gun was like pointed at me and it just triggered me. He's like, how do you guys live
[Guest]: with it? And this was something that, you know, you think that this is not something
[Guest]: that you can even question. So you don't, you become fearful. It's a way of subjugating
[Guest]: you without touching you. It's the way it works on your psyche. It's because it's not
[Guest]: an armored vehicle. It's not a patrolling party. It's not, it doesn't come and go. It
[Guest]: doesn't whiz past you. It's there, the structure. And it's intimidating. At the same time, it's
[Guest]: like a, I think it's designed to be made that way. Like very, very intimidating. And also
[Guest]: like you, you don't cast a second glance in that direction. You don't know what you want
[Guest]: to see.
[Amit Varma]: You've also spoken at different parts of the book about how as a young girl, you became
[Amit Varma]: more and more aware of what you call the militaristic gaze, though you've used the phrase elsewhere,
[Amit Varma]: not in the book, because I'm guessing the girl wouldn't know the phrase, but you kind
[Amit Varma]: of see it. And at one point, you write quote, to an extent, and you're writing about how
[Amit Varma]: you'd always, you know, wear the scarf and all that. And at one point, you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: to an extent, the scarf made me feel protected. And yet that feeling of unease never quite
[Amit Varma]: left me completely. And so I began to ignore caring for my skin. I thought maybe if I looked
[Amit Varma]: ugly and less pleasant, the men would not look at me and I'd be safe. I wouldn't wash
[Amit Varma]: my face for days. I didn't want to look attractive in any way at all, lest it invite undue attention
[Amit Varma]: and that indescribable guilt. I wanted to somehow become invisible, stop quote and later
[Amit Varma]: you talk about how at a particular point in time, your gait change where you became hunched
[Amit Varma]: back because you're passing by in the space and you're holding your school bag or whatever
[Amit Varma]: in front of you. And, you know, and for a young girl, it's like, it's one thing to become
[Amit Varma]: aware of the male gaze at a certain point in time. But this is sort of another level
[Amit Varma]: of it, you know, the militaristic gaze as you've called it elsewhere. So what was this
[Amit Varma]: phase like? And how does one then snap out of it? You know, what was that process like
[Amit Varma]: of coming to terms with what was going on and achieving a kind of psychological normalcy
[Amit Varma]: to say if such a thing is possible? Later in time, I'm saying, as you kind of move on,
[Amit Varma]: like when you look back at that girl, you know, it's I think that girls just comes to
[Guest]: the fore every now and then, even when I'm home, let's say even if I'm dressed as normally
[Guest]: as I do now, but I'll still wear each other. Even now, I just feel more comfortable like
[Guest]: that. I don't, it's that otherwise I'll be like very, very anxious. I wouldn't be able
[Guest]: to and this is something that I've tried to do away with, but I just feel far more relaxed
[Guest]: if I have each other or like a big dupatta around me. I may or may not necessarily don't
[Guest]: cover my head, but it's the body. I was actually recently talking to this friend of mine, he
[Guest]: and I were the same batch and he's now a well-known orthopedic back home and he said, it's also
[Guest]: a very gendered thing. He said, you know, but we also had fairly, we were probably luckier
[Guest]: of the lot and we had like protective parents and we had that kind of childhood and I said,
[Guest]: did we really? Like, have you thought about it from your sister's point of view? And suddenly
[Guest]: he tells me, oh, you know what, she doesn't answer the phone and her phone is always on
[Guest]: the silent because and there was also this particular time where she survived a grenade
[Guest]: attack, but the shrapnel and the shell is still lodged in her temple and it doesn't
[Guest]: have to be operated upon. If you actually get it, you can, unless it's like somewhere
[Guest]: lodged in your vitals, you have to take it out, otherwise it can just, I said, exactly
[Guest]: that have you thought about it from your sister's perspective? Because he then went out and
[Guest]: he studied in Manipal or somewhere. So again, these are things which you can't discuss with
[Guest]: your family members. Like, what are you going to, how are you going to come back home and
[Guest]: what are you going to tell your parents? Like, I was gazed or latched at or looked at by
[Guest]: a cop or a trooper or even a militant at that point. Like, what are they going to do? Parents
[Guest]: are supposed to protect you and that's not something they can do at that point. So you
[Guest]: absorb that and you feel this heaviness with you all the times which you have to carry
[Guest]: no matter what. And you have to put up a brave face because that's where you have to live.
[Guest]: And I think talking about this brother and sister, for him to even empathise, it's because
[Guest]: it's not spoken. So it's very difficult even within the society for other members to imagine
[Guest]: what a young girl probably goes through and feels. So that never leaves you. I mean, we
[Guest]: also saw that after August 5, 2019, there was this fashion brand that put out this particular
[Guest]: campaign about Kashmiri women and promoted. And it was, and I had flown the same afternoon
[Guest]: from Delhi, from Kashmir to Delhi. And I remember seeing that and it was just like, mind boggling.
[Amit Varma]: What was it saying? Sorry, I don't recall seeing it.
[Guest]: It was a brand called Raw Mango. And then they had put out this particular campaign
[Guest]: Zuni, where a girl, Kashmiri girls were on Shikara posing. They probably had shot it
[Guest]: before August 5. But I had just come back and I remember taking a photo of two troopers
[Guest]: at the back and two women walking with their heads, etc. covered. And this is the time
[Guest]: when everyone was like, we'll get Kashmiri brides now and we'll have, so you had ministers
[Guest]: go on record talking about that. You know, now we can marry Kashmiri women. So that kind
[Guest]: of vulnerability is a very, and I think I just took to social media and I found it extremely
[Guest]: offensive, not even otherisation, but it's like women and women doing this to women.
[Guest]: It's almost, you suddenly question feminism in South Asia then at that point. And you're
[Guest]: like, is there actual solidarity there? But I also get it, like, it's something, it's
[Guest]: such a big blind spot, this gendered aspect of how women deal with some things. You see
[Guest]: someone getting killed, we have been speaking about that, those things, but these little
[Guest]: things which are not articulated, are not spoken about, and then, but you feel them
[Guest]: and they're as visible. And that's far more damaging and then you have to almost prove
[Guest]: that and you have to talk about it. I mean, I think one of the reasons why I wrote this
[Guest]: book as well was when I used to talk to my friends about these incidents, I used to have
[Guest]: their attention and they would listen and there was, but again, something else would
[Guest]: happen back home and then they would ask the same question again. Like, what led to it?
[Guest]: Why is it happening? So, it gets extremely, I think I'm sort of even feeling that heaviness
[Guest]: right now when I talk about it. It's, from a woman's point of view, you're like, how
[Guest]: do I even? I think it creates now, when I talk about it, it creates a sense of such
[Guest]: vulnerability. It doesn't sort of leave you and you know you're the only protector.
[Guest]: Nobody else can save you. I mean, nobody will speak about you. Nobody will understand this
[Guest]: pain and it's also, I don't know, I remember reading Frantz Fanon many, many years later
[Guest]: and then in Wretched of the Earth, he talks about how French used to basically demoralize
[Guest]: Algerians by attacking their women and they might not even have done anything bad to them
[Guest]: but just to whisper something in a guy's ear to seed that doubt there would break families.
[Guest]: So, a woman is also conscious of that kind of punishment to the society. So, then you,
[Guest]: I think, keep just holding it inside until it becomes another being within you that you
[Amit Varma]: have to carry with you all the time. I just, you know, when you just said that,
[Amit Varma]: I remembered this absolutely execrable film, terrible film, which came out a few years
[Amit Varma]: ago starring Hrithik Roshan, where he and the heroine, I forget who was playing it,
[Amit Varma]: were both blind and it's essentially a kind of a revenge story, like a blind person taking
[Amit Varma]: revenge for what happened to his wife and they were both blind and she was raped once
[Amit Varma]: and he felt very bad about it and she was raped again and then eventually she killed
[Amit Varma]: herself, leaving a note to the effect of, if I remember correctly, saying something
[Amit Varma]: like that, I'm killing myself because I know that I will be raped again and again and I
[Amit Varma]: feel terrible about what it will do to you. Which is, you know, almost such a typical
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood male-centric way of, you know, coming at it.
[Amit Varma]: One of my favourite novelists, George Seminone, once said, once like thought aloud and said,
[Amit Varma]: is it possible for any person to ever truly understand any other person? And what he was
[Amit Varma]: saying kind of takes me there, like even when I read the book, I thought that if I meet
[Amit Varma]: this person as an adult, and at this point I'm not thinking of you, I'm thinking of the
[Amit Varma]: narrator, but if I meet this person as an adult, would I ever really know her? I don't
[Amit Varma]: even think it's possible because there is just so much subterranean stuff, like recently
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Varun Grover and I rewatched his, the great film he wrote, Masaan, where
[Amit Varma]: you have these two parallel lives of people who have loved and lost, and they meet at
[Amit Varma]: the end. And you think that, okay, even if they have a happily ever after thing, they'll
[Amit Varma]: never truly know one another. Because what happened at the background is sort of just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there are so many depths to it, you can only kind of go so far. So I have
[Amit Varma]: a question, which is again, me thinking aloud, that when you pointed out that as a defensive
[Amit Varma]: reaction, as a girl, you would wear the scarf, you would want to be invisible. And when you
[Amit Varma]: pointed out that sometimes you have that same instinct today. And I'm just wondering that
[Amit Varma]: if in some societies, in some contexts, you can have a sort of a vicious circle, in which
[Amit Varma]: to get away from the oppressive male gaze, if the society is, you know, that repressive
[Amit Varma]: and that regressive, women can cover themselves more and more. And therefore, that gaze can
[Amit Varma]: get even harsher and sharper and more aggressive. And it's kind of a race to the bottom. And
[Amit Varma]: then eventually, you could have an equilibrium, where the men are what they are incredibly
[Amit Varma]: toxic and all of that. And the women are just covering themselves all the time. And that
[Amit Varma]: vicious circle is something that societies perhaps need to watch out for. And there is,
[Amit Varma]: of course, at the other end, a virtuous cycle, which is possible, you know, so just thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud, what are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest]: See, we know that that's not the solution, right? I mean, that it can't work like that.
[Guest]: But for women, just like I said earlier, maybe that was my defense mechanism, maybe other
[Guest]: girls did something else. So I think it's to generalize that everyone would do that
[Guest]: is too much of a generalization. I mean, there was a time when there was this moral diktat
[Guest]: prescribed for Kashmiri women that you have to cover up and you have to basically wear
[Guest]: a bhaiya and have a modest dress code, but that didn't really last for long. Because
[Guest]: I think it was, that was really not the answer. That was really not the answer. It's different
[Guest]: women will have different ways to cope with it. And what happens, like, you're always
[Guest]: thinking what's happening to you is probably not of as great consequence or importance
[Guest]: as what's happening on the street. So whether it's, it's essentially the woman who is decimating
[Guest]: her own self in the process, and who thinks that the more, you know, the less visible
[Guest]: she is, it's better for herself. So you try to make yourself scarce in whichever ways
[Guest]: you can. I remember when I went to, when I was studying in Singapore, and I used to have
[Guest]: these flatmates. And there was a couple, I think on weekends, I just wouldn't wash my
[Guest]: face. I mean, I know it sounds very unhygienic right now. But and it was that initial behaviors
[Guest]: that I had that I had to sort of work on to get rid of. And this friend of mine was studying
[Guest]: computing from Delhi. And he was like, you could be in a war zone. So I would just like
[Guest]: look at him and say, yeah, that's exactly where I come from. So to your point, that
[Guest]: is it even possible to even know what's going on with the other person? And despite, I mean,
[Guest]: it's just like takes one hour to fly from Sri Lanka to Delhi. But he's like, I remember
[Guest]: used to be like, you should have just grown up in a war zone, you just. So it's, I mean,
[Guest]: there is a brilliant book by Rafia Zakaria, where she talks about how feminism in brown
[Guest]: women is looked at in the realm of being instructional, something to learn from something to, but,
[Guest]: but it's not the solidarity isn't extended. And I could connect with it as a Kashmiri
[Guest]: where you know, you look at the whole of South Asia, and then there are cases which are picked.
[Guest]: I mean, I was recently, I was telling I was working on this project on gender equality.
[Guest]: And of course, there's this argument, if women, if girls don't go to school, they drop out,
[Guest]: then of course, it's going to impact the economy. I personally know some women in the outskirts
[Guest]: of Srinagar, who dropped out because they had to walk past camps, army camps. And I
[Guest]: was like, who has done the study? Nobody. So again, it's a huge question mark, then
[Guest]: how do we pick and choose what we want to know? And yeah, that's a separate debate in
[Guest]: my head. And that really, when I was growing up, you know, I would always have this excuse
[Guest]: that 89 was a particularly bad year. You had Tiananmen Square, you had not bad year, but
[Guest]: a year of significant happenings around the world. Dalai Lama won his Nobel Prize, there
[Guest]: was the tearing down of Berlin Wall, there was Tiananmen Square. And you wonder, and
[Guest]: my excuse, the naive excuse to myself was, there was too much happening in the world
[Guest]: and the world didn't care about us. Otherwise, people would have, you know, raised their
[Guest]: voice and turned their gaze at us and spoken about us, till you realize that it's your
[Guest]: own fight. And it's a battle that you will have to sort of fight and nobody else, even
[Guest]: sometimes within the society, within the community, not everyone is going to have that kind of
[Guest]: stamina to plough it through.
[Amit Varma]: One of the points which you make in your book, and you know, there are so many sort of illustrations
[Amit Varma]: of that is how women process all of this differently. And just as an illustration of this, I was
[Amit Varma]: struck by the story of Nasir and Nasreen, you know, two of the characters you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: and Nasir, I think was a cousin, but slightly, I mean, he had mental health issues, and he
[Amit Varma]: wasn't quite all there. And the family used to worry about, okay, what's going to happen
[Amit Varma]: to him and blah, blah, blah. And the idea was you get him married to someone nice, this
[Amit Varma]: will sort itself out. They find this nice girl, Nasreen, who marries him, they get along
[Amit Varma]: well, everything's fine. But then one day he forgets his ID card, like it was in the
[Amit Varma]: pocket of a shirt, something spilled on the shirt, he changed his shirt. I think he gets
[Amit Varma]: caught in a bus and, you know, he gets beaten up. And when he gets back home, he becomes
[Amit Varma]: a different person in the sense that he deals with this by resorting to violence and beating
[Amit Varma]: her up. And she deals with it by eventually drowning herself. And, and throughout the
[Amit Varma]: book, you, you know, you've not just written about yourself, you've written about so many
[Amit Varma]: women in this book. And they're all dealing with it differently than men would. And they're
[Amit Varma]: also dealing with it differently than each other. You know, you, you know, you wrote
[Amit Varma]: about your grandmother and pointed out that to her, it must have been so bewildering that
[Amit Varma]: the entire world has changed around her, around her. She's trapped in this house where the
[Amit Varma]: world is not what it used to be. And the house is like a prison. And the question is, how
[Amit Varma]: do you even process what is going on? Right? So tell me a little bit about this, about
[Amit Varma]: women processing it differently and dealing with it in different ways. And, yeah.
[Guest]: So there used to, there was a particular night when I go to my, when I went to my aunt's
[Guest]: house and I was missing her. And there was this, their, their house is at the banks of
[Guest]: Nagin Lake. And there used to be night patrol, which I was unaware of at that point, because
[Guest]: we were in downtown Srinagar. So what, there was no aquatic patrol near our house. So I
[Guest]: witnessed it for the first time. And I remember the way they used to shine light, which was
[Guest]: like a bright, really bright light in the middle of the night. And then it would just
[Guest]: wake you up. And I remember this cousin of mine, I think she was seven, six or seven
[Guest]: at that point, and she was holding her amulet around her neck. And she would start sobbing
[Guest]: at that light. And it was only much later, it made me concerned at that point. It was
[Guest]: only much later that I processed that, you know, as kids, we're scared of darkness. And
[Guest]: she was scared of light as a child. It was really heartbreaking later. And so she was
[Guest]: like, I remember her sister would say, yeh taweez har jege leke jaati hai, that mum has
[Guest]: got for her because she starts shivering and I keep telling her, don't take it to the toilet.
[Guest]: The sister is like completely nonchalant about it. But that six year old kid was really scared
[Guest]: of light. So from her to my aunt saluting, thinking that if she salutes the patrolling
[Guest]: party or the troops, they would be lenient. Like the word she said was, they'll have mercy
[Guest]: on us. So for a 60 year old to seek mercy, for a six year old to sort of be unnaturally
[Guest]: scared of light, or for a 16 year old me wanting to disappear or vanish, it just tells you
[Guest]: how everyone is sort of dealing and suffering silently. They're not sharing it with anyone.
[Guest]: If we wouldn't have got that aunt of ours saluting the troops, if I wouldn't have been
[Guest]: aware of how I walked during the first crackdown that I walked through, or how this cousin
[Guest]: of mine reacted. I mean, it's a very personal thing and they wouldn't get up in the morning
[Guest]: and say, well, this is what happened and I held on to my taweez and it's a very personal thing.
[Guest]: You're constantly dealing with things you can't even imagine can happen to you. And
[Guest]: you behave in such unique ways that the other person, I mean, it's a big joke in our family
[Guest]: till date, actually, this aunt saluting the troops. Everyone laughs. And she used to have
[Guest]: a particular, I think there was once towards when she started growing really old. These
[Guest]: cousins of mine recount this particular incident where once after firing, she started saying,
[Guest]: oh, there were big flowers on this carpet, where did they go? And they laugh about it,
[Guest]: but it's not something that you laugh. I mean, I don't know what that gunfire, those gunshots
[Guest]: did to her at that point. And they're like, yeah, you do remember. She's like, I'll tell
[Guest]: her brother that there were flowers here, where did they go? Or there is Nasreen who
[Guest]: killed herself. I mean, that is probably the most, that's a rare or that was the rare statement
[Guest]: of protest to kill herself and say, I don't want to deal with this. But everyone deals
[Guest]: with or had or did deal with it with so much of, with suffering silently all the time.
[Guest]: So there was a lot of, I think, the kind of sisterhood and unspoken and unstated sisterhood
[Guest]: you see in conflict zones, etc. The power of that is something else. And it's only later
[Guest]: that you realize what that did and how actually women sort of keep those communities going
[Guest]: on. If they were to collapse, these societies won't last at all. It's like extreme resilience.
[Guest]: It's that resilience of and that heroic courage to just get through from one day to another
[Guest]: and not talk about it. And not even think that anything unusual is happening to you.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me more about those sisterhoods.
[Guest]: It's just that, for example, these cousins of mine, which I've not mentioned in the book
[Guest]: because it happened much later. So there is a certain decorum associated with how you,
[Guest]: you know, what you buy and how you shop and the way you deal with the shopkeepers, etc.
[Guest]: So these cousins of mine, they used to send us kids to buy undergarments for them. So
[Guest]: they would keep a cutout of, let's say, a bra or whatever. And then they would just
[Guest]: give it to us and say, just go to this particular shop and just buy it and it would have all
[Guest]: the details. For them, for that cutout not to be discovered during a crackdown used to
[Guest]: be, and because during the crackdown, the father or brother would be assisting the troops
[Guest]: and that to come out of a cupboard and then to deal with that embarrassment and shame.
[Guest]: It's just like heartbreaking at a level which no one tries to understand. And then the sisterhood
[Guest]: was also about, I think women were kinder to each other in that time, especially. And
[Guest]: also there were no public places. So there was a lot of being there for each other. You
[Guest]: see a lot of, probably some extent of hostility amongst men. But women, I think the kind of
[Guest]: support and the care that you get, the capacity to accommodate is far greater, I feel, in
[Guest]: conflict zones, amongst women especially, than you see anywhere else. The rest, you
[Guest]: actually see, you can see through the superficiality and you know you'll never be able to replicate
[Guest]: what was there. Again, it's that time, may not be true now. But I mean, there was a phrase
[Guest]: that my aunt used to use, if you saw something happen somewhere and she would say, which
[Guest]: is basically, try and cover people's mistakes and be kind. Which is, you know, let's say
[Guest]: you wanted to like bitch about someone, you wanted to like. So again, the ways you accommodated,
[Guest]: I think because their experiences probably were as excruciating as yours. So they sort
[Guest]: of give that leeway to the other person and think, okay, I mean, I think it just becomes
[Guest]: like it sort of expands your being, if I were to call it like that. You know, it's sort
[Guest]: of accommodate a little extra from the other person. And yeah, people will help, they will,
[Guest]: no questions asked, especially women. There was this young girl I spoke to after the book
[Guest]: came out and she was in this hijab. She was part of a bunch of journalists I was talking
[Guest]: to. And she had never spoken to her colleagues before that. And then she just opened up about
[Guest]: how she was nearly raped. And that's what led to her covering up completely. Again,
[Guest]: she just opened up for the first time. I mean, I feel like it took a woman from that time,
[Guest]: which is that girl that the book talks about, for her to open up finally about an experience
[Guest]: which if you looked at her, you would probably think, oh, she's this extreme, like, you know,
[Guest]: a woman who observes religion and the codes very seriously. But her motivation was very
[Guest]: different. And she just opened up to that, a woman from that time, probably thinking
[Guest]: that the pain really was collective. It gets heavy.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And would it then be the case at the risk of simplifying and the risk of generalizing,
[Amit Varma]: but I'm just kind of thinking aloud, that sisterhoods that form in this way, you know,
[Amit Varma]: recognize something, recognize a deeper truth about what women go through, recognize interior
[Amit Varma]: lives, kind of, you know, shine a light on each other without, you know, being explicit
[Amit Varma]: about it. And there's something therefore very strong about that. Whereas the connections
[Amit Varma]: that men make are far shallower and far weaker. Like, first of all, men don't even express
[Amit Varma]: their emotions, forget to each other, even to themselves. You never have those kinds
[Amit Varma]: of connections really forming, it's kind of rare. So all your, all the typical male connections
[Amit Varma]: and I don't want to stereotype my own gender, but the typical connections will be, let's
[Amit Varma]: have a beer together and all of that, but without a necessary recognition of the other
[Amit Varma]: person's interior life and what you're going through and all of that. And there isn't,
[Amit Varma]: of course, that, that shared backdrop of continuous pain. It is not that men don't suffer in different
[Amit Varma]: ways. You know, you have that guy in the banker blowing his brains out. But, you know, it's
[Amit Varma]: without, so it just seems to me that one kind of solidarity and network is just really deep
[Amit Varma]: and under the surface and really strong. And the other one is kind of the opposite. And
[Amit Varma]: am I, I mean, am I generalizing too much? Am I essentializing too much? Or, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: See, when I was growing up, the biggest anxiety or fear was like forgetting your identity
[Guest]: card at home, and then you could have been picked up or slapped or, or men not coming
[Guest]: back after a crackdown, not coming back home. And to be honest, what, when men were out
[Guest]: at the crackdown, assembled in a, in a ground somewhere, school ground, I mean, in a, in
[Guest]: a school or some open ground, you know, it was like women, like automatically turned
[Guest]: into these like, soldiers of the house, really protecting everything, whether it was the
[Guest]: honour, whether it was their lives or the house or putting up that brave face, which
[Guest]: gets, their courage is not played up as much. But what the anxiety that the guy goes through,
[Guest]: the focus is on, on him. It's like that, what the movie you were talking about earlier,
[Guest]: that the woman getting raped and then saying what it could do to you. But the way women
[Guest]: sort of, and it was not something that was, that we gradually were eased into. It was
[Guest]: thrust upon us as much as it was on men. But for some reason, and we recognize and it's
[Guest]: imagine like, we are in a, we're living in this cluster of, we're part of the cluster
[Guest]: of the houses, and there are about 60 family members in 10 houses. Men are out, and then
[Guest]: there are just women there. So it's like, like that subliminal, subconscious force that
[Guest]: you see around you. Even now today, if something happens, I just go back and like tap into
[Guest]: it. Like I'll connect with an aunt or I'll connect with a cousin. It's that the life,
[Guest]: the energy that you get or the safety, the protection you get is lifelong. But like I
[Guest]: said, in men, one could see because I think I'm also attributing it to the counterinsurgency
[Guest]: Ikhwan, because that really broke that brotherhood. There were instances where women also suffered.
[Guest]: I remember there was this girl who was considered to be an informer, and they didn't shoot her,
[Guest]: but they just cut her hair or chopped her braid off and hung it from a pole. And as
[Guest]: a 17, 18-year-old girl, you see the humiliation of that young girl. And it's, I mean, we never
[Guest]: heard of her again. So it's the punishment, the sufferings, the ordeals of women. And
[Guest]: I think they don't even speak about it, but they almost recognize it in each other. And
[Guest]: it's not something that you overtly talk about or see what happened that day. It's like a
[Guest]: very quiet strength that you give each other, which is what you, I don't know, look for
[Guest]: in other relationships as you grow up, and which is rare and one you sort of understand
[Guest]: that that can't be replicated because, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And men will always sort of, especially in our type of traditional society, see themselves
[Amit Varma]: as protectors. And in this kind of conflict zone, when you're the receiving end of everything,
[Amit Varma]: you can't protect nothing, right? You are, in a sense, pretty helpless. And yet the tendency,
[Amit Varma]: the male tendency would not be to sort of, you know, share in the practicality that the
[Amit Varma]: women might show and, you know, recognize it as a shared suffering and let's get through
[Amit Varma]: this. But instead, it would perhaps, I imagine, be an anger at not being able to find a solution
[Amit Varma]: and being not man enough, as it were to do something about this. Tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about how you have seen men react in these kind of circumstances, because I imagine it
[Amit Varma]: must be so crippling to the ego and the ego is central to being male, right?
[Guest]: Emasculation is real, for sure, in such geographies. It's also that there was this friend of mine,
[Guest]: she and her friend, she and her sister, they'd gone to this tailor and they'd left home and
[Guest]: they couldn't reach the tailor. It was like a 25 minute drive and there was crackdown
[Guest]: in the middle of, on the road, I mean, during their commute. And they got stuck there for
[Guest]: five hours and they couldn't, they could neither move forward nor come back. And eventually
[Guest]: the crackdown got over, they made it back. And I remember we laughed about it and they
[Guest]: said our father was actually waiting with a meat cleaver saying, I'm going to kill you.
[Guest]: It's like, obviously he wouldn't have done that, but it's that a father feels so helpless
[Guest]: that they could have been taken away, whatever could have happened to them. I mean, he wouldn't
[Guest]: have had any control. He wouldn't have been able to retreat them. So it was like, it's
[Guest]: better that I kill my own children rather than see bad things happen to them.
[Guest]: It's the same thing which struck me later when you read Toni Morrison's Beloved. And
[Guest]: she'd actually picked it up from one of the newspaper clippings where the woman had killed
[Guest]: her own child rather than give it to a slave catcher. It was such a stark thing. Like,
[Guest]: you know, when she would talk about her father had this meat cleaver in her hand and we would
[Guest]: laugh about it. But you see, you hear increasing incidents of domestic violence, which basically
[Guest]: earlier it was hush hush, but now it's people talk about it. For me, the first incident
[Guest]: was when Rubaiya Syed was kidnapped. Her father was the Home Minister of India at that point.
[Guest]: So that, as a child, gives you a glimpse of what you're up against as a woman and what
[Guest]: can be done. Like, someone as powerful as her father couldn't protect her. Who are you?
[Guest]: I mean, you know that anything can happen. So for, I mean, I remember someone asked me
[Guest]: this question once, like, were you okay talking about the most intimate details and things
[Guest]: in your book? I was like, you don't feel, you don't have a sense of privacy back home.
[Guest]: You know, it's like your lives are open and everyone knows everything and you just, you
[Guest]: just feel you can't protect anything. So emasculation, definitely at one level, but also at, everyone
[Guest]: has this, I mean, probably the fact that I couldn't come back and, or anyone can't come
[Guest]: back and say someone, a uniformed person or someone, like even a militant, looked at me
[Guest]: and passed a comment. You're ordinary civilians. What are you going to do? You don't have a
[Guest]: gun. You don't have the wherewithal to fight them back. So you just, I mean, then I think
[Guest]: that was also initially people were accepting of it and saying, this is another thing on
[Guest]: women and another burden that you must carry. But now I think women are pushing back, but
[Guest]: yeah, not at the level that they suffer. I mean, that's what I was telling you earlier,
[Guest]: that they are the dual recipients of violence. It's just not, you know, I mean, men for men,
[Guest]: it's just one thing, getting arrested or killed or disappeared. But for women, it's, they
[Guest]: can be used against their own people. I think that's the knowledge which is, which lets
[Guest]: you sort of, last two years ago, I had this friend who had come from UK and she wanted
[Guest]: to see Gulmarg and Gondola and we went together. I hadn't seen it till then. So we, so there
[Guest]: are two levels. So one goes up to 4,000, another goes up to 14,000. She wanted to go to Aparvar.
[Guest]: So I went with her to 4,000 because I can't take heights and I have breathing issues.
[Guest]: So there was a blizzard in that moment and mum was waiting downstairs and the Gondola
[Guest]: just went from 14,000 straight down. It didn't stop in between. And then once the blizzard
[Guest]: cleared up and then we were brought down from the 4,000 feet, that particular height. And
[Guest]: mum was a sight to behold when I came downstairs and she was like, she, I haven't seen that
[Guest]: kind of panic in a long time in her. And we had this driver who was a Kashmiri and he
[Guest]: said, how do you deal with them staying by themselves and travelling? He's like, no,
[Guest]: you can't understand. This is Kashmir. She can just disappear and I'll never get to see
[Guest]: her again. So the mothers being aware of that, that reality about their daughters, daughters
[Guest]: feeling that kind of vulnerability and yet trying to live their lives as best as they
[Guest]: can. And she knows, she knew in that moment that even her father, like my father, wouldn't
[Guest]: be able to do anything. Who would he go and ask for? What happened? That kind of awareness
[Guest]: about how you will not be able to protect your own child, forget about it being a thing
[Guest]: about between genders, is crippling for parents to have this knowledge that we may not be
[Guest]: able to. And then women sort of try and subdue themselves and try and not come in the way
[Guest]: of, not be a matter of concern for their parents or become, I mean, it's a strange existence
[Guest]: which the more you think about it, it's like, how did one even survive those years or even
[Guest]: now sometimes?
[Amit Varma]: Looking back and writing your book was obviously an act of self-examination, but also what
[Amit Varma]: you're doing is you're looking at everybody else with kind of new eyes, at your grandmother,
[Amit Varma]: at your parents, your sister, everyone around you. And like, has that led to the feeling
[Amit Varma]: that you understand them better today? That is there more empathy, is there more sympathy?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a sense that you saw just one aspect of this, perhaps a way they're related to
[Amit Varma]: you and that's it. And you missed everything else that might have been happening to them.
[Amit Varma]: You know, has that changed the way you look at them? And equally, you know, what is what
[Amit Varma]: do they feel now when they read the book and did they perhaps see a side of you that they
[Guest]: never saw?
[Guest]: My mum cried when she read the book. She read it twice and she was like, is that what you
[Guest]: went through when you had your period? And she was almost like, how did you not tell
[Guest]: me? And she actually cried. And I think the biggest revelation was for my father. He looked
[Guest]: at my mother and said, oh, your mother smoked? I didn't know. So it was, I was filled with
[Guest]: the rage that you were talking about earlier. When I, I think it was only possible that
[Guest]: I studied in Singapore and Singapore is known to be extremely safe for women, right? So
[Guest]: you can be, I remember when I used to work with Reuters, I used to do night shifts and
[Guest]: Reuters has this office in Science Park and Science Park is known to be this foresty,
[Guest]: very secluded spot in Singapore. And I used to walk down at four in the morning, five
[Guest]: in the morning, alone by myself to the hospital canteen. There's NUH right next door, about
[Guest]: a kilometre and get myself a snack and go back without a worry in my head, like anything
[Guest]: was going to happen to me. If I were to like, I don't know, live in, soon after Srinagar,
[Guest]: live in Delhi or South Asia, it would probably have been very different experience because
[Guest]: then you're seeing degrees of women going through what they're going through, right?
[Guest]: But Singapore just made me extremely angry. And I was like, oh, so dignity and freedom
[Guest]: is possible in the world. It's only just denied to a bunch of people. So that really made
[Guest]: me angry. And yeah, so I actually had like angry 30s. I was like, I used to be and then
[Guest]: you sort of look at, you don't only look at your family. I mean, one has used one's family
[Guest]: to show it like what, how many different ways is a conflict process by one family. And if
[Guest]: you were to go to different families, let's say who have someone missing in the family.
[Guest]: In my aunt's case, when she used to dig her son's grave, she doesn't talk about him anymore.
[Guest]: She talks so much. I mean, that changed her personality. She talks incessantly, but she
[Guest]: never utters, even by mistake, anything about her son. So I'm only talking about my immediate
[Guest]: family and them and saying that this is just like really like the tip of the tip of the
[Guest]: tip of the iceberg and how women whose fathers are missing, brothers are missing, sons are
[Guest]: missing. Like what is going on with them who have had no closures? Or there was this, my
[Guest]: mother's orthopedic, Dr. Farooq Ashai. So my mother has acute osteoarthritis and osteoporosis.
[Guest]: When her orthopedic was killed, she just didn't go to an orthopedic for like 15 years till
[Guest]: her bones reached a spot. I think it was her way of sort of escaping that, that she couldn't
[Guest]: deal with him being killed in such a manner. But I also know the orthopedic's daughter,
[Guest]: who was my senior in school. So now their story would be something else and how it impacted
[Guest]: my mother and then how it reached me. So I think each household will have stories that
[Guest]: one can't even imagine or their realities will be so different. So it's just when you
[Guest]: think of that and then instead of empathy, I mean you're all in it together. How do you
[Guest]: feel it for the other person? You're like, I think you feel a sense of grave injustice.
[Guest]: You're like, for what, really? What's the human cost of this deterioration of people
[Guest]: and their psyches and their lives at this scale? For what, honestly? I mean, I think
[Guest]: that's the only question.
[Amit Varma]: Has a book changed the way you talk with your mother, talk with your family and the things
[Guest]: that you talk about? I think now my mother trusts me with discussing Farooq Farooqzad's
[Guest]: poetry. She's a Persian poet. So early she should think I wasn't really mentally up there.
[Guest]: And she also trusts me with writing a thank you note to someone that she has to thank.
[Guest]: Yeah, that has changed. But some people now talk about their experiences more. It's almost
[Guest]: like she's going to chronicle them. And I don't want that. I just want to see what comes
[Guest]: naturally. But yeah, maybe some family members. But this has been a huge thing that my mother
[Guest]: now feels I'm ready to talk about some poetry, which earlier she thought I wouldn't get.
[Amit Varma]: So Nadine Gordimer speaks about what she calls witness literature. Right. Tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about your thoughts of this, that when you set out to write the book, was it just
[Amit Varma]: a sense of you are writing your story? Or was it also a sense of that there are other
[Amit Varma]: layers to this? I'm not just writing a story where it's one event after another, but I'm
[Amit Varma]: taking a deeper look at what lies behind those. So tell me a little bit about, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: know, was there a deeper sense in your writing that it's not just I'm just I'm just writing
[Amit Varma]: a memoir, there's something more to it than that. And, and is that intent and is that
[Amit Varma]: kind of writing part of a bigger tradition out there, which you've taken inspiration
[Amit Varma]: from? And if so, who are the writers you sort of looked at who've done this kind of writing?
[Guest]: I think Nadine Gordimer was, I stopped reading men. I have been struggling to write right
[Guest]: for the last, what was since 2008, 9. And I consciously stopped reading men. And I,
[Guest]: the book that actually propelled me to write was Nadine Gordimer's The Late Bourgeois World.
[Guest]: So every time I would get stuck, I would just read a page or two, and I would just come
[Guest]: back on the track. So her witness literature is something that I read after writing the
[Guest]: book, I think I was once reading about like, I had to talk to someone, and I was reading
[Guest]: up, there's this book of hers, a collection of essays called Telling Tales of Time. So
[Guest]: that's when I it's she talks to specifically talks about how journalists chronicle days
[Guest]: and events and how you know, then you may sit and make sense of it. But it was not something
[Guest]: that I knew of when I was writing it. But when I was writing, it was about I didn't
[Guest]: even I mean, I just had like a very ordinary childhood. But I think there was like a few
[Guest]: things which bothered me that that night of coming back from the salon. And then because
[Guest]: I had like really lush hair, I think that was like loss. And then for like a couple
[Guest]: of years, I had no hair at the crown. I had plucked it all. And those changes, which and
[Guest]: then you when you see what other things are happening to other women, then you forget
[Guest]: about these things. So it was really to capture the time of what was happening to that little
[Guest]: world around me. So it wasn't I never thought that I would like I mean, you when you think
[Guest]: of memoirs, etc, you think of Obama and you think of people who've led that kind of bureaucratic
[Guest]: political lives. It was more of a I think, see in Kashmir, there were three, four main
[Guest]: incidents which took place since 1846. So there was Treaty of Amritsar, where we were
[Guest]: sold along with our land and people by the British to Dogras. And for 75,000 Nanak Shahi
[Guest]: rupees, a few goats and a few Pashmina shawls. So that was one event. Then the second was
[Guest]: and if and then there is of course, there is before that there is Yusuf Shah Chak being
[Guest]: he was the last Kashmiri emperor being taken. He was jailed by Akbar and he died in exile
[Guest]: and we have his we had his wife, Habba Khatun and her ballads are famous and they have passed
[Guest]: on from like to us from generations. So we had that event. Then we had Treaty of Amritsar.
[Guest]: Then we had 1931, Weaver's Uprising where there were 22 workers who were killed, unarmed
[Guest]: workers and we used to sell like sort of commemorate 13 July. Now there is no such thing. It has
[Guest]: been taken off the calendars. And then there was accession. Then there was a couple more
[Guest]: incidents but three main incidents, Treaty of Amritsar, 1931 Uprising and the 90s and
[Guest]: we have no social history of the previous two. And this was also I think once I finished
[Guest]: the first draft and I had written largely about the memories that I had. But then I
[Guest]: made a conscious decision to include culture and a way of living in it and incorporate
[Guest]: that into it because it doesn't exist anymore in Kashmir. So if you were to really look
[Guest]: at what happened, how did people live then, you'll find nothing. And the part of Srinagar
[Guest]: that I grew up in, there was just like Shah Hamdan Shrine, Khan Kaimola is like three,
[Guest]: four minutes away. Then you have Badshah's tomb that he made for us. So it's like historically
[Guest]: a very rich, culturally rich place and it was an economic hub. So sort of keeping that
[Guest]: alive. So in witness literature, part of it, but also social history, part of it. And which
[Guest]: is where I think that is something that I did consciously. Witness literature of course
[Guest]: there are memories that you sort of have of yours and some are associated with your family
[Guest]: members and friends. But yeah, the culture part was a deliberate choice to include that
[Guest]: in. And there's also, like recently I went to this particular university and I opened
[Guest]: that session by saying, when I say Kashmir ki Kali, what comes to your mind? So some
[Guest]: of them were too young to even know it was Sharmila Tagore. So I said, no, she's Bengali.
[Guest]: She's not Kashmir ki Kali. So for the longest time, I mean, for a lot of people who would
[Guest]: see me outside Kashmir would say, well, but you don't look Kashmiri. And I'd be like,
[Guest]: what is your definition of Kashmiri? Sharmila Tagore. Definitely I don't look like her.
[Guest]: So sometimes you're also made to look at yourself in a very strange way. You know, you are like
[Guest]: the whole time you have to look a certain way. Or for example, someone really beautiful.
[Guest]: Someone will have a beautiful aunt in their clan and she'd look like Saira Bano. So not
[Guest]: being able to look at yourself as who you are. I mean, there is this book by Ananya
[Guest]: Jahangir Kabir. She is called a territory of desire. So it's almost like the way Kashmir
[Guest]: is depicted, Roja for that matter, depopulated landscape and beautiful landscape. And then
[Guest]: you also have a benchmark of how you should look. So what does that do to your identity
[Guest]: and your being? So that's where there are like a lot of references to the way my grandmother
[Guest]: would take care of my hair. It's a very different way. Like I haven't heard many cultures where
[Guest]: they use Mercury, Seema and Ghee. So retaining those nuances and almost constructing a little
[Guest]: girl's or young girl's world and who she is and the way she looks was another level of
[Amit Varma]: I don't know reclaiming identity. Yeah, the bit about Mercury and Ghee was fascinating
[Amit Varma]: because I'd never imagined those two things could go together or indeed that you could
[Guest]: do anything with Mercury. She had this insane patience. She was just like keep doing that
[Guest]: to her hand the whole time. And she'd also had this particular potion, which I now read
[Guest]: as poisonous, but it's worked. I don't know what else did she put in it. She would soak
[Guest]: quince seeds, quince apple seeds and they emitted like there was a sap that would come
[Guest]: out a gluey kind of texture and then she would apply that also. So, which a Kashmir Kikali
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't. Yeah. So question about identity now, because this is very interesting where
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about, you know, and I see two different kinds of conflicting sort of impulses here.
[Amit Varma]: And the one impulse that I think young people have and everyone should have is of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: asserting their own individuality as, you know, separate from everything around them.
[Amit Varma]: You are who you are. You don't want to be, you know, put in a box and you know, we contain
[Amit Varma]: multitudes we want to express them all and that's one urge. But the other urge or the
[Amit Varma]: other temptation might well also be of asserting yourself as part of a group identity. And
[Amit Varma]: this can come in two ways, especially when you're in a conflict zone or a besieged land.
[Amit Varma]: It can come number one as a kind of assertion against the oppressor, where you embrace that
[Amit Varma]: very thing you're being oppressed for and you know, as a kind of defense mechanism.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is to seek solidarity within your community and to say that, okay, we are
[Amit Varma]: all together in this, we are part of this. So, I mean, question not just with regard
[Amit Varma]: to you, but with all the people that you see around, that how does, how do these conflicting
[Amit Varma]: urges play out? Because at one, on one hand, you want to be defined and say that I am this
[Amit Varma]: and I'm proud of it. And you want to show solidarity with your people and say, I'm just
[Amit Varma]: like you. And you know, we have an aunt who looks like Sarah Bono and we're all together
[Amit Varma]: in this, but you're also much more than that. And you also want to strike out on your own
[Amit Varma]: and you also might want to say that, yes, we have a shared past, but I want to transcend
[Amit Varma]: this shit. So, you know, how does that play out?
[Guest]: When you say a conflict society or not, women, girls, especially, are impacted by how they're
[Guest]: perceived, right? So, to start rebellious in that vein, sometimes works, sometimes doesn't.
[Guest]: I was an extremely fearful teenager, but I then just one fine day, something, I think
[Guest]: I also write it in the book, that too much fear can catapult into fearlessness. So then
[Guest]: I became like, I'm going to do what I want to do and what I want to pursue. And otherwise,
[Guest]: for me to convince my parents to actually let me study in Singapore was unthinkable.
[Guest]: So that was that. But you also see how I recently met this journalist who has been harassed.
[Guest]: Like, she was also on that extremely offensive app that Bulli Bai or Suli Bai. So, but she's
[Guest]: doing her thing and that hasn't stopped her. And she is freelancing and I met her recently
[Guest]: at home and she was, you could see an undeterred determination on her face and she was going
[Guest]: to do what she could in her capacity. So that's identity at one level. But then there is also
[Guest]: like, like I said, conflict or no conflict, every society will have these little biases
[Guest]: and how you should look and how you shouldn't. But initially, I think when you're young,
[Guest]: you sort of fall into that trap. And then later, if you're lucky enough and brave enough
[Guest]: to find your own, then you sort of want to do what you want to do. But again, it's not
[Guest]: that easy for girls, I feel. But younger girls, younger women especially are now at least
[Guest]: quite a few of them doing what they want to do. Like, it's as simple as there is this
[Guest]: girl who designed, so we wear Peran in Kashmir, right? And there's this embroidered patch
[Guest]: on right on the chest. Somebody just created this very original design of the Kashmir map
[Guest]: because it was bifurcated and she designed it on the Peran. And that was, that just sold
[Guest]: quite a bit, that design, that pattern. Recently, I was in Polo View looking for a gift for
[Guest]: a friend's daughter. And he showed me a really beautiful necklace again, Kashmir map. This
[Guest]: is not something that you saw. I mean, you would see Chenar motifs and you would see
[Guest]: something else. And now these things, which means that if people are making it, there's
[Guest]: definitely a demand somewhere. So yeah, jewellery, clothing. I remember when I was growing up
[Guest]: again, a Peran was seen as something very regressive. Like, if you came from good families
[Guest]: and educated people, then you didn't wear Peran. Peran was for peasants. Again, it's
[Guest]: like how within your own society, you made to otherise your own people and also like,
[Guest]: I think, create class differences. But now I just see like everyone, the minute it starts
[Guest]: getting cold, and now it's the state who bans Peran every few years because they feel that
[Guest]: you could be carrying something inside. But now people are taking pride slowly in our
[Guest]: culture and creating that larger identity or being a part of that. And also being, I
[Guest]: think, younger generation, even in Kashmir, is pursuing music, reinventing old songs by
[Guest]: Mahjoor or Haba Khatun in a new way. Like you have Ali Saifuddin, you have Parwaz, you
[Guest]: have Ahmed, you have Faraz, quite a few of them. And girls also. Painting, like creating
[Guest]: art, which earlier, which nobody did earlier. So there's awareness and acceptance and I
[Guest]: think also a lot of pride now.
[Amit Varma]: At one point in the book, you mentioned how one of the ways that you coped with as a young
[Amit Varma]: person was reciting the Surafeel. I hope I'm pronouncing it right. Surafeel, which is a
[Amit Varma]: religious verse. And that got me to thinking about the role that religion can play, firstly,
[Amit Varma]: as consolation for whatever is happening. Secondly, as an anchor, where you can locate
[Amit Varma]: yourself in the world and there is a sense of solidity to it. But also, I wonder, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the kind of role that it can play in a besieged society where you can almost then
[Amit Varma]: express it more overtly as a show of defiance, right? And there are different ways in which
[Amit Varma]: this could manifest itself that, you know, if you feel persecuted, you could react to
[Amit Varma]: this either by completely suppressing whatever you're being persecuted for, or you could
[Amit Varma]: go in the other direction and say, okay, I'll wear it on my sleeve. I am who I am. And that's
[Amit Varma]: the kind of defiance. And it can also then, you know, go in, it can go in all kinds of
[Amit Varma]: interesting directions, like you were, you know, we were chatting out in the break, and
[Amit Varma]: you said how you noticed that many Kashmiris now when they are doing interior decoration
[Amit Varma]: of the building, their houses are more ostentatious than they used to be. Whereas, you know, earlier,
[Amit Varma]: it used to be much more subdued and so on and so forth. And obviously, I'm not inviting
[Amit Varma]: you to do any kind of pop socializing. I know you won't do that. But in general, do you
[Amit Varma]: think that there is then a natural tendency, ki agar is domain mein dabha ke rakha hai,
[Amit Varma]: toh is domain mein main express karunga?
[Guest]: Definitely. I mean, that's just natural, right? So religion, and I mean, there are two different
[Guest]: things. So religion, I remember at my point, it was, I mean, I remember, in the house,
[Guest]: we would, we had a murbi sahib who would come and help us with Quranic lessons. And there
[Guest]: was flexibility. If you couldn't fast, then nobody pressurized you, you were asked to
[Guest]: pray. But whether you did or not, again, was sort of left up to you. I mean, my mum would
[Guest]: always say that I would get asked, as a parent, did you ask them, then it's your own thing.
[Guest]: And then you will get asked on the day of judgment. So she would remind us, but she
[Guest]: would never say, like, thrust it on us, upon us. So religion became, there were very few
[Guest]: seeds of stability, which were left in the 90s. Everything was changing, everything had
[Guest]: changed overnight. But shrines remained. But there was Saar Sharif, which was, there was
[Guest]: a massive fire there. But these were seen as seeds of stability, as places where, which
[Guest]: not only were about religion, but where, which gave you a lot of solace and a lot of peace,
[Guest]: and which is what they even do now. And shrines that you go to, much to the popular perception
[Guest]: that you know, wherever there's conflict, and it has to be religiously motivated, or
[Guest]: it's a communal thing. So there were two points to religion and these shrines was, I had my
[Guest]: tutor Gopinath Kaul, who would first go to Kali's Mandir in Zainakadal, and then drop
[Guest]: by at Khanka, Shahim Dan's shrine. So you saw harmony in that. So again, that was like
[Guest]: a continuation from those times. So, and then there was another thing where there was no,
[Guest]: so to speak, strict gender segregation, you could be in the courtyard, and there could
[Guest]: be 10 other men standing there. So you just like walk in and there are certain spaces
[Guest]: which are reserved for men, but there was no such strong gender segregation, which made
[Guest]: you feel like you were unwanted. So the way I've seen religion there, and how one is engaged
[Guest]: with it has been very different from what's portrayed. It's largely shown as communal
[Guest]: as and people, I mean, because I mean, we've seen after 9-11, how sort of the narrative
[Guest]: around Islam, but you really found that syncretism and you found that harmony, you saw continuity
[Guest]: in that, at that point. And, but it also gives you the protection, especially for women,
[Guest]: for men, it works against. If you are seen observing overtly visible symbols of Islam,
[Guest]: whether you have a beard, or you're wearing your pyjamas above your ankles, that could
[Guest]: get you arrested. But it gives women some sort of, like, don't mess with me, that kind
[Guest]: of power, because it's like, this might just invite trouble. So again, I think there's
[Guest]: like a gender thing there, like if you see a woman wearing an abaya, which is what happened,
[Guest]: our generation tried to resist it, or they resisted, we didn't wear. But increasingly,
[Guest]: you saw more and more women sort of wearing it. And then it was really like, I mean, I
[Guest]: could completely understand it was not overnight gravitational pull towards a different kind
[Guest]: of school of thought in Islam. But it was, it was also like, safety as I mean, possibly,
[Guest]: I mean, I don't want to, again, generalise, it's a sensitive thing to each their own.
[Guest]: But again, drawing from that conversation, I had that with that reporter, who had that
[Guest]: horrible experience. And then she was like, she basically wanted, she said, I blush very
[Guest]: fast. And if I see someone, and if it reminds me of something horrible, and it shows on
[Guest]: my face, and I can't hide it. So all you see is our eyes. So again, very different approach,
[Guest]: some might purely do it for religious reasons, but some also do it for other reasons too.
[Guest]: So again, religion, very much like generalised, in that sense there.
[Guest]: And when you talk about these things, and suddenly,
[Guest]: you know, it's like a different experience again.
[Amit Varma]: So let's sort of talk about the evolution of the book, because one thing that you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: was that the original form of the book is not how it ended up, there were multiple drafts
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. So how did you start thinking about it? And how did you arrive
[Amit Varma]: here? Because one of the things that strikes me on reading this book, which I love so much,
[Amit Varma]: it's impressionistic, and it's, you know, it feels really perfect as it is. But it's also,
[Amit Varma]: there's a certain kind of bravery here in terms of form, because it is not the conventional
[Amit Varma]: memoir, it doesn't have a conventional kind of structure, you are avoiding many temptations that
[Amit Varma]: might otherwise have been there to take a broader look to give your grand theory,
[Amit Varma]: but instead, you've kept it a very personal and intimate look. And I think it's all the more
[Amit Varma]: powerful for it where you chose to zoom in, rather than zoom out. And I think that really works.
[Amit Varma]: But how did you arrive at this? And were there any models like were there any books that you
[Amit Varma]: looked at and said that, you know, I want to do something like this?
[Guest]: I'm gonna answer this. I mean, I'm going to talk about the second one first, there were no models,
[Guest]: because I really didn't. I wanted to write it, I wasn't sure it was going to get published,
[Guest]: to be honest. I was like the political climate that we're in. In fact, when Harper Collins called
[Guest]: me to give him my author copies a day before the actual date of publishing, I thought,
[Guest]: I got a text from them. And they said, let's meet for coffee tomorrow. So I was like,
[Guest]: okay, they're meeting me basically to tell me, we can't go ahead. Sorry, we had to drop it for
[Guest]: some reason. And this is after August 5 2019. Right. So I thought, okay, so I was ready for
[Guest]: that as well. But to the first part, it was, like I said, I was writing the memories and I was
[Guest]: writing this to have a broader, a big narrative that these would sort of help me push the narrative
[Guest]: forward. But as I started writing, what I realized was everything had been written about on Kashmir,
[Guest]: and from a journalistic point of view, and I definitely didn't want that. So if you see there
[Guest]: are events mentioned, and there is citation at the book. So if anyone wants to see that particular
[Guest]: event, or a political historical event, they have the notes at the back. But it was a deliberate
[Guest]: choice. I just feel people connect. I mean, if the goal is to, I remember when I used to,
[Guest]: I used to write, I used to tell my friends, if it changes one person's heart, or outlook towards
[Guest]: Kashmir, my job here is done. I think we humans connect to human stories, we've heard enough about
[Guest]: journalistic statistics. And that was also one of the main points of anguish that I had that we have
[Guest]: always been converted into statistics by everyone. I was not going to do that. So I think I was trying
[Guest]: to impart some dignity to our lives, which we have been robbed of throughout. So that's why that
[Guest]: a little bit of telling it like, and I think I've always connected with books which talk about
[Guest]: humans. I mean, I know I wrote nonfiction, but I rarely read nonfiction. You know, I just like love
[Guest]: stories. And I just like want to read about people and their resilience and their quest for whatever
[Guest]: they're looking for. And I think if you live through a particularly turbulent period in history
[Guest]: or time, you don't look at yourself as how journalists would come and report on you. You
[Guest]: remember incidents, and you remember stories, and you remember who did what. And so it was to be
[Guest]: closer to my own experience, then just do what everyone else was doing. And also I find it,
[Guest]: I somehow couldn't write about Kashmiris. I had to write as one. Because you in nonfiction,
[Guest]: you expect a certain amount of that kind of distance that you will write about subject,
[Guest]: you will write. But I somehow, I was like, that's already been done.
[Guest]: And I remember that last chapter was the first chapter. It was a weird habit I had of attesting
[Guest]: the dead. And it was also then like self examining my own behaviours. Why was I doing that? So I used
[Guest]: to like sign it. And at that point, I thought it was power, because my aunt was his professor. And
[Guest]: every time I had to get my documents attested, I would go to her. But then later it was like,
[Guest]: it was almost also like imparting the dignity to people who had died of natural causes.
[Guest]: Because all along you heard of mass graves and people dying in hordes, whether it was Haval or
[Guest]: Tengpora or Besbihara. And then suddenly you have people who were dying the way again, I think it's
[Guest]: like holding on to that continuity, which kept eroding increasingly.
[Amit Varma]: A question about your journey. I mean, one way of looking at your journey would be that you grew up
[Amit Varma]: in Kashmir, you went out, you became a journalist, and you realised that you what you wanted to do
[Amit Varma]: was you wanted to tell the story about your childhood and about Kashmir. And that's what
[Amit Varma]: you did. And that leads us to an event or an action, right, that you're sitting and writing
[Amit Varma]: the book. And another way is that, in the course of doing that job, and, you know, and then reflecting
[Amit Varma]: on where you came from, and wanting to write this book, it changed the way you kind of viewed
[Amit Varma]: yourself. So this book wasn't just an isolated action, it was part of the person that you were,
[Amit Varma]: and it was, you know, a continuous part of a coherent narrative. So, you know, so what's the way to then
[Amit Varma]: understand that? What is your conception of yourself? That was this book an isolated project
[Amit Varma]: to scratch one particular itch? Or are you this kind of writer now? Are you a writer who is doing
[Amit Varma]: this kind of examination? And if so, you know, what kind of writer are you? What are your interests
[Guest]: now? What are you working on? Where do you see yourself going? I see, like I said, our stories, people,
[Guest]: they just fascinate me. And I'm only moved by them. Because I think we've been like, victims of too
[Guest]: much of being like statistics everywhere. So definitely, I mean, I, I looked at myself,
[Guest]: I think more than myself, it was really, oh, what happened to that person? What happened to Cole?
[Guest]: Like he couldn't talk, and he only had one word, which was Malay, and he lost that as well.
[Guest]: So you think of that, and you think of other things that happened to other people.
[Guest]: And then you just think about those events and stories. And there's a lot of,
[Guest]: this is this, it's not sadness, but it's like melancholy that you're filled with. And
[Guest]: I think that moves me far more than anything else. But there's also like,
[Guest]: like the next book that I'm working on, which is a loose adaptation of Little Women.
[Guest]: It's about a story about four girls, right? And they, now it's about 94 onwards. And they've sort
[Guest]: of learned to navigate the conflict and the life. And they just do the craziest stuff,
[Guest]: craziest stuff, you know, which we did while growing up, which you can't imagine, all you can
[Guest]: imagine is Kashmir war, 90s. But we also went to school, we also gossiped, we also spoke to boys
[Guest]: at night, we also did that. Like, but of course, then there is the backdrop of what was happening.
[Guest]: And it gets impacted by everything. But it's also about how there's a certain kind of erasure you're
[Guest]: trying to resist, which news reports, which when others write about you, is very palpable. Like,
[Guest]: it's again, I think it's resisting that kind of erasure. And by not, I mean, even in
[Guest]: this nonfiction, it is narrative nonfiction, you're still talking, you know, in a story like
[Guest]: manner. Yeah, so it's still that, that I'm interested in that we are not only about what
[Guest]: happened to us. We can't just be defined by that. We have 1000s of years of culture, history,
[Guest]: regular ordinary people. And that is what the fight is about, right? It's about your
[Guest]: living with dignity and, and but what we've also endured. And, and especially and again,
[Guest]: then the focus is especially on women who just don't, I mean, what has surprised me, of course,
[Guest]: the book is, the readers have been extremely kind, it has had the kind of reception that it did.
[Guest]: But Kashmiri young girls connecting to it, and writing papers in their courses about it,
[Guest]: in Ashoka, and DU and Kashmir. I wasn't really expecting that. But for again, it's like,
[Guest]: they're relating to your experiences. This is like, I don't know, it's, it's, for me,
[Guest]: that's like big, bigger than any, any review or anything that could come this book's way.
[Guest]: For young girls for 20 years, it's saddening at one level, because they can relate to what's
[Guest]: happening. They almost like say, Oh, if I felt like it was my story. I mean, why should they
[Guest]: also live through that what I mean what our generation did? The privations that war brings,
[Guest]: but for them to engage with this book, it's it's like, you know, they finally feel like they can
[Guest]: finally feel like they can talk about things they can write, they can tell their stories. And
[Guest]: I it's, it's not that I did some heroic thing, but it was just like,
[Guest]: I don't know, I just, you know, I mean, I remember, there was a male journalist back home,
[Guest]: who would tell me once he told me what are you going to write about everything has been written
[Guest]: about. I was like, not my story, not the way we grew up. And he's like, yeah, this everything is
[Guest]: written. I remember when Basharat B read the book, and I sent it to him. And he was like,
[Guest]: I was very sure that I had read everything on Kashmir. I just didn't think of the experiences
[Guest]: that women had in this context. So it was like, in that sense, it was just trying to tell how you
[Guest]: grew up and nothing else. And it also tells you how heartbreaking how women get sidelined,
[Guest]: if something of this magnitude happens. So yeah, I think I'm always going to write
[Guest]: stories about people I politics, everyone writes about that. But
[Amit Varma]: yeah, yeah, I mean, the inward look really worked for me. And I think sometimes what books can do
[Amit Varma]: is they can give you permission to think differently about the world. Like I can imagine
[Amit Varma]: young girls reading this book, and allowing themselves that self reflection, and allowing
[Amit Varma]: themselves to divert that inward look towards themselves and not feel that it is self indulgent,
[Amit Varma]: or why should I have value in my feelings or whatever, but and I think it can, I, you know,
[Amit Varma]: certainly play that part. However, I must call you out, because you said you have done crazy things.
[Amit Varma]: And example you gave was you spoke to boys at night. Listen, first of all, there was curfew.
[Amit Varma]: Secondly, there were no smartphones. So, you know,
[Guest]: there was sometimes in the phones would work. And you would like have a have a have a couple of
[Guest]: friends over. And then you know, I'm kidding. But what's the craziest thing you did?
[Guest]: I actually, I didn't do anything. But well, it actually doesn't seem crazy. I mean, I would,
[Guest]: I was meeting Wasim once and there was like a bunch of us meeting in a restaurant.
[Guest]: You know, you think of Kashmir as a patriarchal society, and then conflict and everything.
[Guest]: And I remember there were three of us meeting Wasim, two of my friends, and a couple of militants
[Guest]: saw us and they basically took him away. And they were like, you know, how you I mean, that wasn't
[Guest]: allowed, right? For a period. So they saw him and they took him away. So I just called his brother
[Guest]: up. I said we were meeting and he has been taken away. And can you please like make sure he comes
[Guest]: back? I mean, that that was a very like heroic gesture at that point. Calling his brother.
[Guest]: Yeah, and telling him that, you know, he's been taken away. And I mean, it could get into like,
[Guest]: he could have gotten into serious trouble. Yeah, that was like the first for someone who was really
[Guest]: timid at that point. I think that's one thing that strikes me as having done something. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you know, more power to you. And I can't wait to read your adaptation of
[Amit Varma]: Little Women because you know, after on the evidence of this, it'll be
[Amit Varma]: sort of something I'm looking forward to. So the final question, which I always ask guests who come
[Amit Varma]: on the show is, why don't you recommend art by art? I mean, books, films, music, whatever, that
[Amit Varma]: means a lot to you. And that you want to share with me and my listeners and not necessarily on
[Amit Varma]: this subject or that subject, but stuff that's dear to you. Sure. I mean, Nadine Gordimer's book
[Guest]: again, I think just because how there's energy in her. I've watched a lot of Toni Morrison videos,
[Guest]: I wish I could have met her at some point. I love this film called The Patient Stone by the,
[Guest]: who is it by? I can't remember the director, but it's the actress in it is Golshifte Farhani.
[Guest]: It's about this Afghan woman again. And it's, I think it was on MUBI. It's one of the most
[Guest]: fascinating films, little women, like how all of us sort of saw a glimpse of us ourselves in Joe.
[Guest]: I love Elena Ferrante. And I also really like, Nadine Gordimer I talked about,
[Guest]: there is this Irish writer, I quite, I read, I think if I'm not reading
[Guest]: Raja Shahid or Palestinian writers, sometimes I love Irish literature. I mean,
[Guest]: even the contemporary ones, right. So Anna Burns, Milkman, I find that, I think I've been,
[Guest]: I remember when I used to study literature, I used to basically, that was my way to bond with
[Guest]: my mother. I used to basically tell her stories of from Paradise Lost and Macbeth. And so, yeah,
[Guest]: just stories. And I, I don't know, last few years, it's literally largely been about women,
[Guest]: like, so I'll pick a woman and I'll just watch everything that she's worked on. Greta Gerwig,
[Guest]: I was pretty, like, fascinated with her for a bit. But I think you sometimes feel it's unfortunate
[Guest]: because that you can't, you know, the way you are bringing has been, it has a shadow on your
[Guest]: preference. I mean, it casts a shadow on your preferences. Like, you know, you almost feel
[Guest]: guilty if you haven't, if you don't, if you, let's say, watch comedy for the longest time or read
[Guest]: about, read for pleasure. And if you don't read what's sort of relevant to your experiences,
[Guest]: I don't know, it's something that one has to work on. But Hisham Attar, I really love.
[Guest]: Yeah. And Orhan Pamuk's Museum of Innocence, I thought was beautiful. I mean, I remember reading
[Guest]: Snow, but I think this has far better. And of course, like, bell hooks and, and all the iconic
[Guest]: women, or even, I like love watching documentaries on, like, feminist women. It's just that how did
[Guest]: they do it when, when things were really difficult? I remember, like, some readers would tell me,
[Guest]: oh, wow, you know, you're writing from Kashmir. And I'm like, to be honest, I don't have myself
[Guest]: to thank for. It's my grandmother, who hid from my grandfather that my mother was actually going
[Guest]: to the university. And there was co-ed there. So her only condition was come back before sunset or
[Guest]: a certain time. So it was really the work that my grandmother did. So yeah, I love seeing what
[Guest]: women have done in the past. And we're really reaping the benefits of what they've done for us.
[Guest]: Sorry, I'm not including your gender too much into it.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's fine. I'm perfectly happy. Not that I have anything against,
[Guest]: but it's just that it sort of helps me right now.
[Amit Varma]: And you were naming a bunch of men in a row. I was wondering what's happening,
[Amit Varma]: Matar and Pamuk and all that.
[Guest]: Of course, I did.
[Guest]: I think that comes a bit of culture, a bit of storytelling.
[Guest]: Sebald, I read for the longest time, but I just feel that there is a certain element of
[Guest]: that self-assuredness that you miss in women's writing. And therefore, they try even harder.
[Guest]: And then they sort of work on that.
[Guest]: My big discovery as far as a memoir goes this year is Vivian Gornick. Have you read her?
[Amit Varma]: Vivian Gornick? No, I haven't.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, Shreyana Bhattacharya in her episode with me, which you said you've heard,
[Amit Varma]: sort of recommended that. So sometimes even I will buy books from my own show notes,
[Amit Varma]: and I was just blown away. She's got this great book called The Odd Woman in the City,
[Amit Varma]: Fierce Attachments.
[Guest]: But I've heard her name though, but I haven't read. In fact, I mean, that name struck me
[Guest]: because we were talking about her. I was talking to a friend about her this morning. I mean,
[Guest]: he again recommended another book. There is also this memoir called Shame on Me,
[Guest]: which I read this year by Tessa McWatt. It's again, the form is so different. It's
[Guest]: presented as a research paper to deconstruct race and show it as a construct. It's beautifully done.
[Guest]: And I really liked what Kamala Shamsi did with Home Fire, and how she really took Antigone and
[Guest]: then transformed the whole thing in the last 10 pages. And of course, one grew up reading Didion
[Guest]: and everything by Jane Austen. But yeah, if I were to like, if I get stuck, it's only Nadenh
[Guest]: Kodamurat. She just pushes me into writing. And again, like if you were to sort of analyze it,
[Guest]: she's writing about apartheid and post-apartheid literature, and you wouldn't really read it
[Guest]: probably now, you'd much rather go to someone. But again, I think there's so much of emotional
[Guest]: integrity, and integrity generally in her work, which I think one aspires to, yeah.
[Guest]: And I'll cheat and ask a final question after saying that was a final question, but
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that it might be helpful. If there are young people listening to this,
[Amit Varma]: who are trapped in oppressive situations, and they don't know how to deal with it,
[Amit Varma]: what would your advice to them be?
[Amit Varma]: Men or women?
[Amit Varma]: Mainly women, but I don't want to leave men out there might well be but obviously mainly women.
[Guest]: I think it's the, I mean, I know it might just sound a little
[Guest]: cliched, and also, I don't know, it's just one life, to be honest, and you can't,
[Guest]: and we all also have like limited time. I think I'm so conscious of this, because I feel like I've
[Guest]: lost a lot of time while growing up, A, with what was going on in the 90s, secondly, with
[Guest]: then dealing with it, and there'll never be a perfect time to sort of pursue what you want to
[Guest]: do. And it's, I think it's that, I mean, I know it sounds really, maybe arrogant, but I always used
[Guest]: to say this when I was growing up, if society, if you put society above me, I'll put myself above
[Guest]: society or something, some juvenile thinking, but it's actually true. I mean, it's like if there's
[Guest]: something you want to do, and if you're passionate about and you, I mean, oppressive society, we all
[Guest]: are, like men are in equally oppressive situations, you know, some, I mean, there are different
[Guest]: motivations, self-awareness, I mean, I honestly, I'm like resisting terms, which could make it
[Guest]: sound like pop psychology, but I don't know, men, checking, A, to be honest, just competing with
[Guest]: your own self. And thinking about how you will better your own self in getting what you where
[Guest]: you want to get, that really takes care of a lot of toxicity. You don't indulge in that. And then
[Guest]: there is, you're focused on one goal, if you have one, and people who even don't have that,
[Guest]: just believing and just doing things that they feel is right in that moment. Gosh, this has been
[Amit Varma]: like the toughest question of this whole session. We should end it here. Farah, thank you so much
[Amit Varma]: for coming on the show. I loved your book and I love this conversation. So thank you.
[Guest]: Thank you so much. I mean, it was a pleasure, honestly, a pleasure to be here. Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to your nearest bookstore online or offline
[Amit Varma]: and pick up Rumours of Spring by Farah Bashir. You can follow Farah on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Farah Bashir, that's one word. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.